Wth loss of Eden




Paradise Lost
John Milton
1667



Book I


Of Man's first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste
Brought death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
Sing, Heavenly Muse, that, on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
That shepherd who first taught the chosen seed
In the beginning how the heavens and earth
Rose out of Chaos: or, if Sion hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook that flowed
Fast by the oracle of God, I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above th' Aonian mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.
And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer
Before all temples th' upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for thou know'st; thou from the first
Wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread,
Dove-like sat'st brooding on the vast Abyss,
And mad'st it pregnant: what in me is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support;
That, to the height of this great argument,
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.
  Say first--for Heaven hides nothing from thy view,
Nor the deep tract of Hell--say first what cause
Moved our grand parents, in that happy state,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his will
For one restraint, lords of the World besides.
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
  Th' infernal Serpent; he it was whose guile,
Stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived
The mother of mankind, what time his pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his host
Of rebel Angels, by whose aid, aspiring
To set himself in glory above his peers,
He trusted to have equalled the Most High,
If he opposed, and with ambitious aim
Against the throne and monarchy of God,
Raised impious war in Heaven and battle proud,
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from th' ethereal sky,
With hideous ruin and combustion, down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In adamantine chains and penal fire,
Who durst defy th' Omnipotent to arms.
  Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he, with his horrid crew,
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf,
Confounded, though immortal. But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes,
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate.
At once, as far as Angels ken, he views
The dismal situation waste and wild.
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
As one great furnace flamed; yet from those flames
No light; but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all, but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed.
Such place Eternal Justice has prepared
For those rebellious; here their prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set,
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole.
Oh how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, o'erwhelmed
With floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns; and, weltering by his side,
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named
Beelzebub. To whom th' Arch-Enemy,
And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence, thus began:--
  "If thou beest he--but O how fallen! how changed
From him who, in the happy realms of light
Clothed with transcendent brightness, didst outshine
Myriads, though bright!--if he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the glorious enterprise
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin; into what pit thou seest
From what height fallen: so much the stronger proved
He with his thunder; and till then who knew
The force of those dire arms? Yet not for those,
Nor what the potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent, or change,
Though changed in outward lustre, that fixed mind,
And high disdain from sense of injured merit,
That with the Mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contentions brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed,
That durst dislike his reign, and, me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious battle on the plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost?
All is not lost--the unconquerable will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power
Who, from the terror of this arm, so late
Doubted his empire--that were low indeed;
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall; since, by fate, the strength of Gods,
And this empyreal sybstance, cannot fail;
Since, through experience of this great event,
In arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal war,
Irreconcilable to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th' excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the tyranny of Heaven."
  So spake th' apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair;
And him thus answered soon his bold compeer:--
  "O Prince, O Chief of many throned Powers
That led th' embattled Seraphim to war
Under thy conduct, and, in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heaven's perpetual King,
And put to proof his high supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event
That, with sad overthrow and foul defeat,
Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror (whom I now
Of force believe almighty, since no less
Than such could have o'erpowered such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire,
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls
By right of war, whate'er his business be,
Here in the heart of Hell to work in fire,
Or do his errands in the gloomy Deep?
What can it the avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminished, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?"
  Whereto with speedy words th' Arch-Fiend replied:--
"Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable,
Doing or suffering: but of this be sure--
To do aught good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which ofttimes may succeed so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
But see! the angry Victor hath recalled
His ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the gates of Heaven: the sulphurous hail,
Shot after us in storm, o'erblown hath laid
The fiery surge that from the precipice
Of Heaven received us falling; and the thunder,
Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip th' occasion, whether scorn
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
Seest thou yon dreary plain, forlorn and wild,
The seat of desolation, void of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend
From off the tossing of these fiery waves;
There rest, if any rest can harbour there;
And, re-assembling our afflicted powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from hope,
If not, what resolution from despair."
  Thus Satan, talking to his nearest mate,
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides
Prone on the flood, extended long and large,
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the fables name of monstrous size,
Titanian or Earth-born, that warred on Jove,
Briareos or Typhon, whom the den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that sea-beast
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th' ocean-stream.
Him, haply slumbering on the Norway foam,
The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff,
Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
Moors by his side under the lee, while night
Invests the sea, and wished morn delays.
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay,
Chained on the burning lake; nor ever thence
Had risen, or heaved his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enraged might see
How all his malice served but to bring forth
Infinite goodness, grace, and mercy, shewn
On Man by him seduced, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath, and vengeance poured.
  Forthwith upright he rears from off the pool
His mighty stature; on each hand the flames
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and,rolled
In billows, leave i' th' midst a horrid vale.
Then with expanded wings he steers his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky air,
That felt unusual weight; till on dry land
He lights--if it were land that ever burned
With solid, as the lake with liquid fire,
And such appeared in hue as when the force
Of subterranean wind transprots a hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
Of thundering Etna, whose combustible
And fuelled entrails, thence conceiving fire,
Sublimed with mineral fury, aid the winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke. Such resting found the sole
Of unblest feet. Him followed his next mate;
Both glorying to have scaped the Stygian flood
As gods, and by their own recovered strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.
  "Is this the region, this the soil, the clime,"
Said then the lost Archangel, "this the seat
That we must change for Heaven?--this mournful gloom
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he
Who now is sovereign can dispose and bid
What shall be right: farthest from him is best
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme
Above his equals. Farewell, happy fields,
Where joy for ever dwells! Hail, horrors! hail,
Infernal world! and thou, profoundest Hell,
Receive thy new possessor--one who brings
A mind not to be changed by place or time.
The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less than he
Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; th' Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reigh secure; and, in my choice,
To reign is worth ambition, though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
Th' associates and co-partners of our loss,
Lie thus astonished on th' oblivious pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy mansion, or once more
With rallied arms to try what may be yet
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?"
  So Satan spake; and him Beelzebub
Thus answered:--"Leader of those armies bright
Which, but th' Omnipotent, none could have foiled!
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers--heard so oft
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge
Of battle, when it raged, in all assaults
Their surest signal--they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lie
Grovelling and prostrate on yon lake of fire,
As we erewhile, astounded and amazed;
No wonder, fallen such a pernicious height!"
  He scare had ceased when the superior Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield,
Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
Behind him cast. The broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orb
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views
At evening, from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands,
Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe.
His spear--to equal which the tallest pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand--
He walked with, to support uneasy steps
Over the burning marl, not like those steps
On Heaven's azure; and the torrid clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with fire.
Nathless he so endured, till on the beach
Of that inflamed sea he stood, and called
His legions--Angel Forms, who lay entranced
Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brooks
In Vallombrosa, where th' Etrurian shades
High over-arched embower; or scattered sedge
Afloat, when with fierce winds Orion armed
Hath vexed the Red-Sea coast, whose waves o'erthrew
Busiris and his Memphian chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursued
The sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating carcases
And broken chariot-wheels. So thick bestrown,
Abject and lost, lay these, covering the flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He called so loud that all the hollow deep
Of Hell resounded:--"Princes, Potentates,
Warriors, the Flower of Heaven--once yours; now lost,
If such astonishment as this can seize
Eternal Spirits! Or have ye chosen this place
After the toil of battle to repose
Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the vales of Heaven?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conqueror, who now beholds
Cherub and Seraph rolling in the flood
With scattered arms and ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heaven-gates discern
Th' advantage, and, descending, tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this gulf?
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen!"
  They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their General's voice they soon obeyed
Innumerable. As when the potent rod
Of Amram's son, in Egypt's evil day,
Waved round the coast, up-called a pitchy cloud
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind,
That o'er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darkened all the land of Nile;
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the cope of Hell,
'Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding fires;
Till, as a signal given, th' uplifted spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Their course, in even balance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the plain:
A multitude like which the populous North
Poured never from her frozen loins to pass
Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous sons
Came like a deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibraltar to the Libyan sands.
Forthwith, form every squadron and each band,
The heads and leaders thither haste where stood
Their great Commander--godlike Shapes, and Forms
Excelling human; princely Dignities;
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on thrones,
Though on their names in Heavenly records now
Be no memorial, blotted out and rased
By their rebellion from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the sons of Eve
Got them new names, till, wandering o'er the earth,
Through God's high sufferance for the trial of man,
By falsities and lies the greatest part
Of mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and th' invisible
Glory of him that made them to transform
Oft to the image of a brute, adorned
With gay religions full of pomp and gold,
And devils to adore for deities:
Then were they known to men by various names,
And various idols through the heathen world.
  Say, Muse, their names then known, who first, who last,
Roused from the slumber on that fiery couch,
At their great Emperor's call, as next in worth
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof?
  The chief were those who, from the pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on Earth, durst fix
Their seats, long after, next the seat of God,
Their altars by his altar, gods adored
Among the nations round, and durst abide
Jehovah thundering out of Sion, throned
Between the Cherubim; yea, often placed
Within his sanctuary itself their shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy rites and solemn feasts profaned,
And with their darkness durst affront his light.
First, Moloch, horrid king, besmeared with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents' tears;
Though, for the noise of drums and timbrels loud,
Their children's cries unheard that passed through fire
To his grim idol. Him the Ammonite
Worshiped in Rabba and her watery plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream
Of utmost Arnon. Nor content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraoud to build
His temple right against the temple of God
On that opprobrious hill, and made his grove
The pleasant valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the type of Hell.
Next Chemos, th' obscene dread of Moab's sons,
From Aroar to Nebo and the wild
Of southmost Abarim; in Hesebon
And Horonaim, Seon's real, beyond
The flowery dale of Sibma clad with vines,
And Eleale to th' Asphaltic Pool:
Peor his other name, when he enticed
Israel in Sittim, on their march from Nile,
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful orgies he enlarged
Even to that hill of scandal, by the grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate,
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they who, from the bordering flood
Of old Euphrates to the brook that parts
Egypt from Syrian ground, had general names
Of Baalim and Ashtaroth--those male,
These feminine. For Spirits, when they please,
Can either sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their essence pure,
Not tried or manacled with joint or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but, in what shape they choose,
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
Can execute their airy purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfil.
For those the race of Israel oft forsook
Their Living Strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial gods; for which their heads as low
Bowed down in battle, sunk before the spear
Of despicable foes. With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians called
Astarte, queen of heaven, with crescent horns;
To whose bright image nigntly by the moon
Sidonian virgins paid their vows and songs;
In Sion also not unsung, where stood
Her temple on th' offensive mountain, built
By that uxorious king whose heart, though large,
Beguiled by fair idolatresses, fell
To idols foul. Thammuz came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate
In amorous ditties all a summer's day,
While smooth Adonis from his native rock
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the love-tale
Infected Sion's daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred proch
Ezekiel saw, when, by the vision led,
His eye surveyed the dark idolatries
Of alienated Judah. Next came one
Who mourned in earnest, when the captive ark
Maimed his brute image, head and hands lopt off,
In his own temple, on the grunsel-edge,
Where he fell flat and shamed his worshippers:
Dagon his name, sea-monster,upward man
And downward fish; yet had his temple high
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon,
And Accaron and Gaza's frontier bounds.
Him followed Rimmon, whose delightful seat
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A leper once he lost, and gained a king--
Ahaz, his sottish conqueror, whom he drew
God's altar to disparage and displace
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn
His odious offerings, and adore the gods
Whom he had vanquished. After these appeared
A crew who, under names of old renown--
Osiris, Isis, Orus, and their train--
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused
Fanatic Egypt and her priests to seek
Their wandering gods disguised in brutish forms
Rather than human. Nor did Israel scape
Th' infection, when their borrowed gold composed
The calf in Oreb; and the rebel king
Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan,
Likening his Maker to the grazed ox--
Jehovah, who, in one night, when he passed
From Egypt marching, equalled with one stroke
Both her first-born and all her bleating gods.
Belial came last; than whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for itself. To him no temple stood
Or altar smoked; yet who more oft than he
In temples and at altars, when the priest
Turns atheist, as did Eli's sons, who filled
With lust and violence the house of God?
In courts and palaces he also reigns,
And in luxurious cities, where the noise
Of riot ascends above their loftiest towers,
And injury and outrage; and, when night
Darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine.
Witness the streets of Sodom, and that night
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door
Exposed a matron, to avoid worse rape.
  These were the prime in order and in might:
The rest were long to tell; though far renowned
Th' Ionian gods--of Javan's issue held
Gods, yet confessed later than Heaven and Earth,
Their boasted parents;--Titan, Heaven's first-born,
With his enormous brood, and birthright seized
By younger Saturn: he from mightier Jove,
His own and Rhea's son, like measure found;
So Jove usurping reigned. These, first in Crete
And Ida known, thence on the snowy top
Of cold Olympus ruled the middle air,
Their highest heaven; or on the Delphian cliff,
Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds
Of Doric land; or who with Saturn old
Fled over Adria to th' Hesperian fields,
And o'er the Celtic roamed the utmost Isles.
  All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Downcast and damp; yet such wherein appeared
Obscure some glimpse of joy to have found their Chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss itself; which on his countenance cast
Like doubtful hue. But he, his wonted pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently raised
Their fainting courage, and dispelled their fears.
Then straight commands that, at the warlike sound
Of trumpets loud and clarions, be upreared
His mighty standard. That proud honour claimed
Azazel as his right, a Cherub tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering staff unfurled
Th' imperial ensign; which, full high advanced,
Shone like a meteor streaming to the wind,
With gems and golden lustre rich emblazed,
Seraphic arms and trophies; all the while
Sonorous metal blowing martial sounds:
At which the universal host up-sent
A shout that tore Hell's concave, and beyond
Frighted the reign of Chaos and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand banners rise into the air,
With orient colours waving: with them rose
A forest huge of spears; and thronging helms
Appeared, and serried shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable. Anon they move
In perfect phalanx to the Dorian mood
Of flutes and soft recorders--such as raised
To height of noblest temper heroes old
Arming to battle, and instead of rage
Deliberate valour breathed, firm, and unmoved
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat;
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage
With solemn touches troubled thoughts, and chase
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they,
Breathing united force with fixed thought,
Moved on in silence to soft pipes that charmed
Their painful steps o'er the burnt soil. And now
Advanced in view they stand--a horrid front
Of dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guise
Of warriors old, with ordered spear and shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose. He through the armed files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole battalion views--their order due,
Their visages and stature as of gods;
Their number last he sums. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and, hardening in his strength,
Glories: for never, since created Man,
Met such embodied force as, named with these,
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warred on by cranes--though all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with th' heroic race were joined
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliar gods; and what resounds
In fable or romance of Uther's son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights;
And all who since, baptized or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread Commander. He, above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower. His form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than Archangel ruined, and th' excess
Of glory obscured: as when the sun new-risen
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the moon,
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all th' Archangel: but his face
Deep scars of thunder had intrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss), condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain--
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from eteranl splendours flung
For his revolt--yet faithful how they stood,
Their glory withered; as, when heaven's fire
Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared
To speak; whereat their doubled ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn,
Tears, such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way:--
  "O myriads of immortal Spirits! O Powers
Matchless, but with th' Almighth!--and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th' event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change,
Hateful to utter. But what power of mind,
Forseeing or presaging, from the depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared
How such united force of gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend,
Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
For me, be witness all the host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven till then as one secure
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his regal state
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed--
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own,
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war provoked: our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile,
What force effected not; that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven.
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption--thither, or elsewhere;
For this infernal pit shall never hold
Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor th' Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full counsel must mature. Peace is despaired;
For who can think submission? War, then, war
Open or understood, must be resolved."
  He spake; and, to confirm his words, outflew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined Hell. Highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven.
  There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurf--undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic ore,
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with speed,
A numerous brigade hastened: as when bands
Of pioneers, with spade and pickaxe armed,
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field,
Or cast a rampart. Mammon led them on--
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From Heaven; for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of heaven's pavement, trodden gold,
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific. By him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Opened into the hill a spacious wound,
And digged out ribs of gold. Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings,
Learn how their greatest monuments of fame
And strength, and art, are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they, with incessant toil
And hands innumerable, scarce perform.
Nigh on the plain, in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude
With wondrous art founded the massy ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the bullion-dross.
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook;
As in an organ, from one blast of wind,
To many a row of pipes the sound-board breathes.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet--
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven;
The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat
Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. Th' ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and straight the doors,
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide
Within, her ample spaces o'er the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof,
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered; and the work some praise,
And some the architect. His hand was known
In Heaven by many a towered structure high,
Where sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o'er the crystal battlements: from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day, and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, th' Aegaean isle. Thus they relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught aviled him now
To have built in Heaven high towers; nor did he scape
By all his engines, but was headlong sent,
With his industrious crew, to build in Hell.
  Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by command
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony
And trumpet's sound, throughout the host proclaim
A solemn council forthwith to be held
At Pandemonium, the high capital
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called
From every band and squared regiment
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended. All access was thronged; the gates
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall
(Though like a covered field, where champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldan's chair
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry
To mortal combat, or career with lance),
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
In spring-time, when the Sun with Taurus rides.
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of their straw-built citadel,
New rubbed with balm, expatiate, and confer
Their state-affairs: so thick the airy crowd
Swarmed and were straitened; till, the signal given,
Behold a wonder! They but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earth's giant sons,
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless--like that pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount; or faery elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forest-side
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still, amidst the hall
Of that infernal court. But far within,
And in their own dimensions like themselves,
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat,
A thousand demi-gods on golden seats,
Frequent and full. After short silence then,
And summons read, the great consult began.



Book II


High on a throne of royal state, which far
Outshone the wealth or Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and, from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain war with Heaven; and, by success untaught,
His proud imaginations thus displayed:--
  "Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!--
For, since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent
Celestial Virtues rising will appear
More glorious and more dread than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!--
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leader--next, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merit--yet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderer's aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence; none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open war or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise may speak."
  He ceased; and next him Moloch, sceptred king,
Stood up--the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair.
His trust was with th' Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather than be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse,
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:--
  "My sentence is for open war. Of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need; not now.
For, while they sit contriving, shall the rest--
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait
The signal to ascend--sit lingering here,
Heaven's fugitives, and for their dwelling-place
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his ryranny who reigns
By our delay? No! let us rather choose,
Armed with Hell-flames and fury, all at once
O'er Heaven's high towers to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against the Torturer; when, to meet the noise
Of his almighty engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels, and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
His own invented torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe!
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That in our porper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat; descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late,
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? Th' ascent is easy, then;
Th' event is feared! Should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction, if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed! What can be worse
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe!
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The vassals of his anger, when the scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour,
Calls us to penance? More destroyed than thus,
We should be quite abolished, and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which, to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential--happier far
Than miserable to have eternal being!--
Or, if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal throne:
Which, if not victory, is yet revenge."
  He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and battle dangerous
To less than gods. On th' other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane.
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed, and high exploit.
But all was false and hollow; though his tongue
Dropped manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsels: for his thoughts were low--
 To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful. Yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began:--
  "I should be much for open war, O Peers,
As not behind in hate, if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate war
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success;
When he who most excels in fact of arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are filled
With armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable: oft on the bodering Deep
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night,
Scorning surprise. Or, could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest insurrection to confound
Heaven's purest light, yet our great Enemy,
All incorruptible, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted, and th' ethereal mould,
Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th' Almighty Victor to spend all his rage;
And that must end us; that must be our cure--
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated Night,
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence or unaware,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger whom his anger saves
To punish endless? 'Wherefore cease we, then?'
Say they who counsel war; 'we are decreed,
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse?' Is this, then, worst--
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heaven's afflicting thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? This Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames; or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? What if all
Her stores were opened, and this firmament
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved,
Ages of hopeless end? This would be worse.
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? He from Heaven's height
All these our motions vain sees and derides,
Not more almighty to resist our might
Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we, then, live thus vile--the race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments? Better these than worse,
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
The Victor's will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal; nor the law unjust
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those who at the spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear
What yet they know must follow--to endure
Exile, or igominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror. This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed,
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour; or, inured, not feel;
Or, changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat; and, void of pain,
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light;
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting--since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to ourselves more woe."
  Thus Belial, with words clothed in reason's garb,
Counselled ignoble ease and peaceful sloth,
Not peace; and after him thus Mammon spake:--
  "Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost. Him to unthrone we then
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yield
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife.
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain
The latter; for what place can be for us
Within Heaven's bound, unless Heaven's Lord supreme
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish grace to all, on promise made
Of new subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne
With warbled hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced hallelujahs, while he lordly sits
Our envied sovereign, and his altar breathes
Ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers,
Our servile offerings? This must be our task
In Heaven, this our delight. How wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue,
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage; but rather seek
Our own good from ourselves, and from our own
Live to ourselves, though in this vast recess,
Free and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile pomp. Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse,
We can create, and in what place soe'er
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heaven's all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his glory unobscured,
And with the majesty of darkness round
Covers his throne, from whence deep thunders roar.
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell!
As he our darkness, cannot we his light
Imitate when we please? This desert soil
Wants not her hidden lustre, gems and gold;
Nor want we skill or art from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may, in length of time,
Become our elements, these piercing fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful counsels, and the settled state
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise."
  He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
Th' assembly as when hollow rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Seafaring men o'erwatched, whose bark by chance
Or pinnace, anchors in a craggy bay
After the tempest. Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another field
They dreaded worse than Hell; so much the fear
Of thunder and the sword of Michael
Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether empire, which might rise,
By policy and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived--than whom,
Satan except, none higher sat--with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A pillar of state. Deep on his front engraven
Deliberation sat, and public care;
And princely counsel in his face yet shone,
Majestic, though in ruin. Sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
The weight of mightiest monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as night
Or summer's noontide air, while thus he spake:--
  "Thrones and Imperial Powers, Offspring of Heaven,
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now
Must we renounce, and, changing style, be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines--here to continue, and build up here
A growing empire; doubtless! while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt
From Heaven's high jurisdiction, in new league
Banded against his throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under th' inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude. For he, to be sure,
In height or depth, still first and last will reign
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and war?
War hath determined us and foiled with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But, to our power, hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not)--another World, the happy seat
Of some new race, called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an oath
That shook Heaven's whole circumference confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould
Or substance, how endued, and what their power
And where their weakness: how attempted best,
By force of subtlety. Though Heaven be shut,
And Heaven's high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed,
The utmost border of his kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here, perhaps,
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onset--either with Hell-fire
To waste his whole creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive, as we were driven,
The puny habitants; or, if not drive,
Seduce them to our party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our confusion, and our joy upraise
In his disturbance; when his darling sons,
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail original, and faded bliss--
Faded so soon! Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain empires." Thus beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish counsel--first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the author of all ill, could spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes: with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews:--
"Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and, like to what ye are,
Great things resolved, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of fate,
Nearer our ancient seat--perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms,
And opportune excursion, we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild zone
Dwell, not unvisited of Heaven's fair light,
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam
Purge off this gloom: the soft delicious air,
To heal the scar of these corrosive fires,
Shall breathe her balm. But, first, whom shall we send
In search of this new World? whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark, unbottomed, infinite Abyss,
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his airy flight,
Upborne with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle? What strength, what art, can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe,
Through the strict senteries and stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection: and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send
The weight of all, and our last hope, relies."
  This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt. But all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In other's countenance read his own dismay,
Astonished. None among the choice and prime
Of those Heaven-warring champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept,
Alone, the dreadful voyage; till, at last,
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake:--
  "O Progeny of Heaven! Empyreal Thrones!
With reason hath deep silence and demur
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light.
Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold; and gates of burning adamant,
Barred over us, prohibit all egress.
These passed, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next,
Wide-gaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape, into whatever world,
Or unknown region, what remains him less
Than unknown dangers, and as hard escape?
But I should ill become this throne, O Peers,
And this imperial sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment in the shape
Of difficulty or danger, could deter
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all. This enterprise
None shall partake with me." Thus saying, rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply;
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised,
Others among the chief might offer now,
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared,
And, so refused, might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th' adventure than his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they rose.
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone, and as a God
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven.
Nor failed they to express how much they praised
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Lose all their virtue; lest bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal.
  Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As, when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, o'erspread
Heaven's cheerful face, the louring element
Scowls o'er the darkened landscape snow or shower,
If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned
Firm concord holds; men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes enow besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait!
  The Stygian council thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers:
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed
Alone th' antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hell's dread Emperor, with pomp supreme,
And god-like imitated state: him round
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms.
Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpet's regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy,
By herald's voice explained; the hollow Abyss
Heard far adn wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers
Disband; and, wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime,
Upon the wing or in swift race contend,
As at th' Olympian games or Pythian fields;
Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted brigades form:
As when, to warn proud cities, war appears
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush
To battle in the clouds; before each van
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears,
Till thickest legions close; with feats of arms
From either end of heaven the welkin burns.
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more fell,
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wild uproar:--
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned
With conquest, felt th' envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th' Euboic sea. Others, more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes angelical to many a harp
Their own heroic deeds, and hapless fall
By doom of battle, and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their song was partial; but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense)
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate--
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and apathy, and glory and shame:
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy!--
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th' obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part, in squadrons and gross bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying march, along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge
Into the burning lake their baleful streams--
Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate;
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton,
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these, a slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets--
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air
Burns frore, and cold performs th' effect of fire.
Thither, by harpy-footed Furies haled,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought; and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixed, and frozen round
Periods of time,--thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink;
But Fate withstands, and, to oppose th' attempt,
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itself the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, th' adventurous bands,
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast,
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
O'er many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death--
A universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good;
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Obominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived,
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
  Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left;
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars
Up to the fiery concave towering high.
As when far off at sea a fleet descried
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their spicy drugs; they on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape,
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear
Hell-bounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice threefold the gates; three folds were brass,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat
On either side a formidable Shape.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold,
Voluminous and vast--a serpent armed
With mortal sting. About her middle round
A cry of Hell-hounds never-ceasing barked
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous peal; yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there; yet there still barked and howled
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore;
Nor uglier follow the night-hag, when, called
In secret, riding through the air she comes,
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape--
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb;
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either--black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides; Hell trembled as he strode.
Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admired--
Admired, not feared (God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned),
And with disdainful look thus first began:--
  "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That dar'st, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire; or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven."
  To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:--
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's sons,
Conjured against the Highest--for which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckon'st thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Hell-doomed, and breath'st defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive; and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before."
  So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th' other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th' arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim; their fatal hands
No second stroke intend; and such a frown
Each cast at th' other as when two black clouds,
With heaven's artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,--then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in mid-air.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown; so matched they stood;
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hell-gate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
  "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried,
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy father's head? And know'st for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whate'er his wrath, which he calls justice, bids--
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!"
  She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:--
  "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou call'st
Me father, and that phantasm call'st my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee."
  T' whom thus the Portress of Hell-gate replied:--
"Hast thou forgot me, then; and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?--once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th' assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heaven's King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th' host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me; but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most averse--thee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becam'st enamoured; and such joy thou took'st
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
(For what could else?) to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory; to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep; and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone; but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled; but he pursued (though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage), and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou saw'st--hourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me; for, when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repast; then, bursting forth
Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly; for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist."
  She finished; and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:--
  "Dear daughter--since thou claim'st me for thy sire,
And my fair son here show'st me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthought-of--know,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th' unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should be--and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round--a place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven; and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know; and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably; all things shall be your prey."
  He ceased; for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:--
  "The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heaven's all-powerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be o'ermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born--
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gav'st me; whom should I obey
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end."
  Thus saying, from her side the fatal key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge portcullis high up-drew,
Which, but herself, not all the Stygian Powers
Could once have moved; then in the key-hole turns
Th' intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease
Unfastens. On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
Th' infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She opened; but to shut
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a bannered host,
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht pass through
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a furnace-mouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary Deep--a dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension; where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are lost; where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave,
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th' Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more worlds--
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with small) than when Bellona storms
With all her battering engines, bent to rase
Some capital city; or less than if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his sail-broad vans
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke
Uplifted, spurns the ground; thence many a league,
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides
Audacious; but, that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity. All unawares,
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumb-down he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance,
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed--
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry land--nigh foundered, on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both oar and sail.
As when a gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, o'er hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded gold; so eagerly the Fiend
O'er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused,
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light; when straight behold the throne
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned
Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his reign; and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon; Rumour next, and Chance,
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
  T' whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:--"Ye Powers
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your realm; but, by constraint
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way
Lies through your spacious empire up to light,
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek,
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven; or, if some other place,
From your dominion won, th' Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound. Direct my course:
Directed, no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
(Which is my present journey), and once more
Erect the standard there of ancient Night.
Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge!"
  Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old,
With faltering speech and visage incomposed,
Answered:  "I know thee, stranger, who thou art--  ***
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heaven's King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard; for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep,
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven-gates
Poured out by millions her victorious bands,
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell,
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world
Hung o'er my realm, linked in a golden chain
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell!
If that way be your walk, you have not far;
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed;
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."
  He ceased; and Satan stayed not to reply,
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire,
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting elements, on all sides round
Environed, wins his way; harder beset
And more endangered than when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks,
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned
Charybdis, and by th' other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he;
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain,
Following his track (such was the will of Heaven)
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length,
From Hell continued, reaching th' utmost orb
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
  But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire,
As from her outmost works, a broken foe,
With tumult less and with less hostile din;
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease,
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light,
And, like a weather-beaten vessel, holds
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off th' empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With opal towers and battlements adorned
Of living sapphire, once his native seat;
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
This pendent World, in bigness as a star
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon.
Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies.



Book III


Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam
May I express thee unblam'd?  since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell?  before the sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest  ***
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escap'd the Stygian pool, though long detain'd
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night;
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend,
Though hard and rare:  Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital lamp; but thou
Revisit'st not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So  thick a drop serene hath quench'd their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veil'd.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt,
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath,
That wash thy hallow'd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit:  nor sometimes forget
So were I equall'd with them in renown,
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace;
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal note.  Thus with the year
Seasons return; but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of nature's works to me expung'd and ras'd,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate; there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receiv'd
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son; on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden plac'd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivall'd love,
In blissful solitude; he then survey'd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there 
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seem'd
Firm land imbosom'd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescrib'd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heap'd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold; so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there plac'd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert;
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who fail'd;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appear'd,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason (reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoil'd,
Made passive both, had serv'd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong$ 'd,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination over-rul'd
Their will dispos'd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose; for so
I form'd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves; I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'd
$THeir freedom: they themselves ordain'd their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav'd:  Man falls, deceiv'd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel;
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill'd
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffus'd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious; in him all his Father shone
Substantially express'd; and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appear'd,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace;
, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompass'd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though join'd
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplish'd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be question'd and blasphem'd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might, 
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed;
Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will;
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsaf'd; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit; and enthrall'd
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe;
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest; so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warn'd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offer'd grace
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavour'd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience; whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well us'd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not done; Man disobeying,
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting God-head, and, so losing all,
To expiate his treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He, with his whole posterity, must die,
Die he or justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Man's mortal crime, and just the unjust to save?
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
And silence was in Heaven: $ on Man's behalf
He ask'd, but all the heavenly quire stood mute,
Patron or intercessour none appear'd,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeature, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have been lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renew'd.
Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought?
Happy for Man, so coming; he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost;
Atonement for himself, or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring;
Behold me then:  me for him, life for life
I offer: on me let thine anger fall;
Account me Man; I for his sake will leave
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
 Freely put off, and for him lastly die
 Well pleased; on me let Death wreak all his rage.
 Under his gloomy power I shall not long
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess
 Life in myself for ever; by thee I live;
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due,
 All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid,
 $ thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
 His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul
 For ever with corruption there to dwell;
 But I shall rise victorious, and subdue
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil.
 Death his death's wound shall then receive, and stoop
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed;
 I through the ample air in triumph high
 Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
 While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes;
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave;
 Then, with the multitude of my redeemed,
 Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return,
 Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
 Of anger shall remain, but peace assured
 And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
 His words here ended; but his meek aspect
 Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
 To mortal men, above which only shone
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
 Glad to be offered, he attends the will
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized
 All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend,
 Wondering; but soon th' Almighty thus replied.
 O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
 My sole complacence! Well thou know'st how dear
 To me are all my works; nor Man the least,
 Though last created, that for him I spare
 Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
 By losing thee a while, the whole race lost.                   

     00021053 
 Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redeem,
 Their nature also to thy nature join;
 And be thyself Man among men on Earth,
 Made fesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed,
 By wondrous birth; be thou in Adam's room
The head of all mankind, though Adam's son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee,
As from a second root, shall be restored
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his sons; thy merit,
Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So heavenly love shall outdo hellish hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume
Man's nature, lessen or degrade thine own.
Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quitted all, to save
A world from utter loss, and hast been found
By merit more than birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being good,
Far more than great or high; because in thee
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds;
Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy manhood also to this throne:
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King; all power
I give thee; reign for ever, and assume
Thy merits; under thee, as head supreme,
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell.
When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven,
Shalt in the sky appear, and fzom thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim
Thy dread tribunal; forthwith from all winds,
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past ages, to the general doom
Shall hasten; such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then, all thy saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad Men and Angels; they, arraigned, shall sink
Beneath thy sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The world shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And, after all their tribulations long,
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth.
Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by,
For regal scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be all in all.  But, all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies;
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.
No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels, with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal regions:  Lowly reverent
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold;
Immortal amarant, a flower which once
In Paradise, fast by the tree of life,
Began to bloom; but soon for man's offence
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows,
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life,
And where the river of bliss through midst of Heaven
Rolls o'er Elysian flowers her amber stream;
With these that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams;
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone,
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled.
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took,
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side
Like quivers hung, and with preamble sweet
Of charming symphony they introduce
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven.
Thee, Father, first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; the Author of all being,
Fonntain of light, thyself invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest
The full blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear,
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes.
Thee next they sang of all creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no creature can behold; on thee
Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides,
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests.
He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created; and by thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations:  Thou that day
Thy Father's dreadful thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming chariot-wheels, that shook
Heaven's everlasting frame, while o'er the necks
Thou drovest of warring Angels disarrayed.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaim
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Father's might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man:  Him through their malice fallen,
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom
So strictly, but much more to pity incline:
No sooner did thy dear and only Son
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined,
He to appease thy wrath, and end the strife
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned,
Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat
Second to thee, offered himself to die
For Man's offence.  O unexampled love,
Love no where to be found less than Divine!
Hail, Son of God, Saviour of Men!  Thy name
Shall be the copious matter of my song
Henceforth, and never shall my heart thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Father's praise disjoin.
Thus they in Heaven, above the starry sphere,
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous globe
Of this round world, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferiour orbs, enclosed
From Chaos, and the inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks:  A globe far off
It seemed, now seems a boundless continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless exposed, and ever-threatening storms
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky;
Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven,
Though distant far, some small reflection gains
Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud:
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids,
On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams;
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
With sails and wind their cany waggons light:
So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey;
Alone, for other creature in this place,
Living or lifeless, to be found was none;
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitory and vain, when sin
With vanity had filled the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life;
All who have their reward on earth, the fruits
Of painful superstition and blind zeal,
Nought seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, empty as their deeds;
All the unaccomplished works of Nature's hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed,
Dissolved on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here;
Not in the neighbouring moon as some have dreamed;
Those argent fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt the angelical and human kind.
Hither of ill-joined sons and daughters born
First from the ancient world those giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renowned:
The builders next of Babel on the plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain design,
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build:
Others came single; he, who, to be deemed
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames,
Empedocles; and he, who, to enjoy
Plato's Elysium, leaped into the sea,
Cleombrotus; and many more too long,
Embryos, and idiots, eremites, and friars
White, black, and gray, with all their trumpery.
Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven;
And they, who to be sure of Paradise,
Dying, put on the weeds of Dominick,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised;
They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that crystalling sphere whose balance weighs
The trepidation talked, and that first moved;
And now Saint Peter at Heaven's wicket seems
To wait them with his keys, and now at foot
Of Heaven's ascent they lift their feet, when lo
A violent cross wind from either coast
Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry
Into the devious air:  Then might ye see
Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers, tost
And fluttered into rags; then reliques, beads,
Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, bulls,
The sport of winds:  All these, upwhirled aloft,
Fly o'er the backside of the world far off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since called
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after; now unpeopled, and untrod.
All this dark globe the Fiend found as he passed,
And long he wandered, till at last a gleam
Of dawning light turned thither-ward in haste
His travelled steps: far distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a structure high;
At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared
The work as of a kingly palace-gate,
With frontispiece of diamond and gold
Embellished; thick with sparkling orient gems
The portal shone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by shading pencil, drawn.
These stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To Padan-Aram, in the field of Luz
Dreaming by night under the open sky
And waking cried,  This is the gate of Heaven.
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes
Viewless; and underneath a bright sea flowed
Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon
Who after came from earth, failing arrived
Wafted by Angels, or flew o'er the lake
Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds.
The stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the doors of bliss:
Direct against which opened from beneath,
Just o'er the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by far than that of after-times
Over mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promised Land to God so dear;
By which, to visit oft those happy tribes,
On high behests his angels to and fro
Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From Paneas, the fount of Jordan's flood,
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore;
So wide the opening seemed, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the ocean wave.
Satan from hence, now on the lower stair,
That scaled by steps of gold to Heaven-gate,
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this world at once.  As when a scout,
Through dark?;nd desart ways with?oeril gone
All?might,?;t?kast by break of cheerful dawn
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some foreign land
First seen, or some renowned metropolis
With glistering spires and pinnacles adorned,
Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams:
Such wonder seised, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seised,
At sight of all this world beheld so fair.
Round he surveys (and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling canopy
Of night's extended shade,) from eastern point
Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantick seas
Beyond the horizon; then from pole to pole
He views in breadth, and without longer pause
Down right into the world's first region throws
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
Through the pure marble air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable stars, that shone
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemed other worlds;
Or other worlds they seemed, or happy isles,
Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles; but who dwelt happy there
He staid not to inquire:  Above them all
The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven,
Allured his eye; thither his course he bends
Through the calm firmament, (but up or down,
By center, or eccentrick, hard to tell,
Or longitude,) where the great luminary
Aloof the vulgar constellations thick,
That from his lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses light from far; they, as they move
Their starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, towards his all-cheering lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
By his magnetick beam, that gently warms
The universe, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep;
So wonderously was set his station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the sun's lucent orb
Through his glazed optick tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compared with aught on earth, metal or stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informed
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire;
If metal, part seemed gold, part silver clear;
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite,
Ruby or topaz, to the twelve that shone
In Aaron's breast-plate, and a stone besides
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea,
Drained through a limbeck to his native form.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and rivers run
Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch
The arch-chemick sun, so far from us remote,
Produces, with terrestrial humour mixed,
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious, and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazzled; far and wide his eye commands;
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all sun-shine, as when his beams at noon
Culminate from the equator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall; and the air,
No where so clear, sharpened his visual ray
To objects distant far, whereby he soon
Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the sun:
His back was turned, but not his brightness hid;
Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar
Circled his head, nor less his locks behind
Illustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round; on some great charge employed
He seemed, or fixed in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandering flight
To Paradise, the happy seat of Man,
His journey's end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherub he appears,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb
Suitable grace diffused, so well he feigned:
Under a coronet his flowing hair
In curls on either cheek played; wings he wore
Of many a coloured plume, sprinkled with gold;
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard; the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned,
Admonished by his ear, and straight was known
The Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seven
Who in God's presence, nearest to his throne,
Stand ready at command, and are his eyes
That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
O'er sea and land: him Satan thus accosts.
Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand
In sight of God's high throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentick will
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
Where all his sons thy embassy attend;
And here art likeliest by supreme decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye
To visit oft this new creation round;
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wonderous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All these his works so wonderous he ordained,
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandering.  Brightest Seraph, tell
In which of all these shining orbs hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining orbs his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with secret gaze
Or open admiration him behold,
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured;
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The universal Maker we may praise;
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes
To deepest Hell, and, to repair that loss,
Created this new happy race of Men
To serve him better:  Wise are all his ways.
So spake the false dissembler unperceived;
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth:
And oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdom's gate, and to simplicity
Resigns her charge, while goodness thi.ks no ill
Where no ill seems:  Which now for once beguiled
Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held
The sharpest-sighted Spirit of all in Heaven;
Who to the fraudulent impostor foul,
In his uprightness, answer thus returned.
Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorify
The great Work-master, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps,
Contented with report, hear only in Heaven:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance always with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Their number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep?
I saw when at his word the formless mass,
This world's material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined;
Till at his second bidding Darkness fled,
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to their several quarters hasted then
The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air, fire;
And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his course;
The rest in circuit walls this universe.
Look downward on that globe, whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;
That place is Earth, the seat of Man; that light
His day, which else, as the other hemisphere,
Night would invade; but there the neighbouring moon
So call that opposite fair star) her aid
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven,
With borrowed light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten the Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot, to which I point, is Paradise,
Adam's abode; those lofty shades, his bower.
Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turned; and Satan, bowing low,
As to superiour Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of earth beneath,
Down from the ecliptick, sped with hoped success,
Throws his steep flight in many an aery wheel;
Nor staid, till on Niphates' top he lights.



Book IV


O, for that warning voice, which he, who saw
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,
Woe to the inhabitants on earth! that now,
While time was, our first parents had been warned
The coming of their secret foe, and 'scaped,
Haply so 'scaped his mortal snare:  For now
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The tempter ere the accuser of mankind,
To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss
Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet, not rejoicing in his speed, though bold
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt; which nigh the birth
Now rolling boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish engine back recoils
Upon himself; horrour and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him; for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step, no more than from himself, can fly
By change of place:  Now conscience wakes despair,
That slumbered; wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad;
Sometimes towards Heaven, and the full-blazing sun,
Which now sat high in his meridian tower:
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou, that, with surpassing glory crowned,
Lookest from thy sole dominion like the God
Of this new world; at whose sight all the stars
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
Of Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere;
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heaven's matchless King:
Ah, wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burdensome still paying, still to owe,
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged; what burden then
O, had his powerful destiny ordained
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition!  Yet why not some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me, though mean,
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heaven's free love dealt equally to all?
Be then his love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay, cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell;
And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O, then, at last relent:  Is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of Hell.
With diadem and scepter high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery:  Such joy ambition finds.
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By ast of grace, my former state; how soon
Would highth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore?  Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow,
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall:  so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my Punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging, peace;
All hope excluded thus, behold, in stead
Mankind created, and for him this world.
So farewell, hope; and with hope farewell, fear;
Farewell, remorse! all good to me is lost;
Evil, be thou my good; by thee at least
Divided empire with Heaven's King I hold,
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new world, shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy, and despair;
Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practised falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched gith revenge:
Yet not enough had practised to deceive
Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down
 The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount
 Saw him disfigured, more than could befall
 Spirit of happy sort; his gestures fierce
 He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
 As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
 So on he fares, and to the border comes
 Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
 Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green,
 As with a rural mound, the champaign head
 Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
Access denied; and overhead upgrew
 Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
 Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
 A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend,
 Shade above shade, a woody theatre
 Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops
 The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprung;                       

    00081429 
Which to our general sire gave prospect large
Into his nether empire neighbouring round.
And higher than that wall a circling row
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit,
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely seemed
That landskip:  And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair:  Now gentle gales,
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who fail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambick, off at sea north-east winds blow
Sabean odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the blest; with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles:
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend,
Who came their bane; though with them better pleased
Than Asmodeus with the fishy0fume
That drove him, though enamoured, from the spouse
Of Tobit's son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound.
Now to the ascent of that steep savage hill
Satan hadjourneyed on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of man or beast that passed that way.
One gate there only was, and that looked east
On the other side: which when the arch-felon saw,
Due entrance he disdained; and, in contempt,
At one flight bound high over-leaped all bound
Of hill or highest wall, and shuer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve
In hurdled cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the fold:
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors,
Cross-barred and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles:
So clomb this first grand thief into God's fold;
So since into his church lewd hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the tree of life,
The middle tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a cormorant; yet not true life
Thereby regained, but sat devising death
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought
Of that life-giving plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had been the pledge
Of immortality.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to vAlue right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views,
To all delkght of human sense exposed,
In narrow room, Nature's whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth:  For blissful Paradise
Of God the garden was, by him in the east
Of Eden planted; Eden stretched her line
From Auran eastward to the royal towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings,
Of where the sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar:  In this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant garden God ordained;
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit
Of vegetable gold; and next to life,
Our death, the tree of knowledge, grew fast by,
Knowledge of good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a river large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
Passed underneath ingulfed; for God had thrown
That mountain as his garden-mould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which, through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn,
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill
Watered the garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood,
Which from his darksome passage now appears,
And now, divided into four main streams,
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm
And country, whereof here needs no account;
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold,
With mazy errour under pendant shades
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain,
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierced shade
Imbrowned the noontide bowers:  Thus was this place
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm,
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind,
Hung amiable, Hesperian fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmy hillock; or the flowery lap
Of some irriguous valley spread her store,
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose:
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves
Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a lake,
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned
Her crystal mirrour holds, unite their streams.
The birds their quire apply; airs, vernal airs,
reathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan,
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
Led on the eternal Spring.  Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower by gloomy Dis
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian isle
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Amion call and Libyan Jove,
Hid Amalthea, and her florid son
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rhea's eye;
Nor where Abassin kings their issue guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop line
By Nilus' head, enclosed with shining rock,
A whole day's journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian garden, where the Fiend
Saw, undelighted, all delight, all kind
Of living creatures, new to sight, and strange
Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native honour clad
In naked majesty seemed lords of all:
And worthy seemed; for in their looks divine
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure,
(Severe, but in true filial freedom placed,)
Whence true authority in men; though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed;
For contemplation he and valour formed;
For softness she and sweet attractive grace;
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large front and eye sublime declared
Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She, as a veil, down to the slender waist
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dishevelled, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best received,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed;
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of nature's works, honour dishonourable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from man's life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence!
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight
Of God or Angel; for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair,
That ever since in love's embraces met;
Adam the goodliest man of men since born
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh fountain side
They sat them down; and, after no more toil
Of their sweet gardening labour than sufficed
To recommend cool Zephyr, and made ease
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their supper-fruits they fell,
Nectarine fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers:
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind,
Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems
Fair couple, linked in happy nuptial league,
Alone as they.  About them frisking played
All beasts of the earth, since wild, and of all chase
In wood or wilderness, forest or den;
Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw
Dandled the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
Gambolled before them; the unwieldy elephant,
To make them mirth, used all his might, and wreathed
His?kithetmroboscis; close the serpent sly,
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His braided train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or bedward ruminating; for the sun,
Declined, was hasting now with prone career
To the ocean isles, and in the ascending scale
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad.
O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold!
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferiour; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
Ah! gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish, and deliver ye to woe;
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill Fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn,
Though I0unpitied:  League with you I seek,
And mutual amity, so strait, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or yOu with me
Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please,
Like this fair Paradise, your sense; yet such
Accept your Maker's work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give:  Hell shall unfold,
Uo entertain you two, her widest gates,
And send forth all her kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous offspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loth to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for `im who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet publick reason just,
Honour and empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new world, compels me now
To do what else, though damned, I should abhor.
So spake the Fiend, and with necessity,
The tyrant's plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree
Down he alights among the sportful herd
Of those four-footed kinds, himwelf now one,
Now other, as their shape served best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied,
To mark what of their state he more might learn,
By word or action marked. About them round
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare;
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play,
Straight couches close, then, rising, changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground,
Whence rushing, he might surest seize them both,
Griped in each paw: when, Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him, all ear to hear new utterance flow.
Sole partner, and sole part, of all these joys,
Dearer thyself than all; needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite;
That raised us from the dust, and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he hath need; he who requires
From us no other service than to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only tree
Of knowledge, planted by the tree of life;
So near grows death to life, whate'er death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowest
God hath pronounced it death to taste that tree,
The only sign of our obedience left,
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and dominion given
Over all other creatures that possess
Earth, air, and sea.  Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task,
To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers,
Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve replied.  O thou for whom
And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my guide
And head! what thou hast said is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Pre-eminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thyself canst no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cavE, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me:  I started back,
It started back; but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love:  There I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me;  'What thou seest,
'What there thou seest,(fair Creature, is thyself;
'With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
'And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
'Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
'Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy
'Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
'Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
'Mother of human race.'  What could I do,
But follow straight, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a platane; yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Than that smooth watery image:  Back I turned;
Thou following cryedst aloud, 'Return, fair Eve;
'Whom flyest thou?  whom thou flyest, of him thou art,
'His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
'Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart,
'Substantial life, to have thee by my side
'Henceforth an individual solace dear;
'Part of my soul I seek thee, and thee claim
'My other half:'  With that thy gentle hand
Seised mine:  I yielded;and from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace,
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spake our general mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half-embracing leaned
On ur first father; half her swelling breast
NAked met his, under the flowing gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her beauty, and submissive charms,
Smiled with superiour love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds
That shed Mayflowers; and pressed her matron lip
With kisses pure:  Aside the Devil turned
For envy; yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plained.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two,
Imparadised in one another's arms,
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss; while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines.
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths:  All is not theirs, it seems;
One fatal tree there stands, of knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste:  Knowledge forbidden
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
Envy them that?  Can it be sin to know?
Can it be death?  And do they only stand
By ignorance?  Is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods: aspiring to be such,
They taste and die:  What likelier can ensue
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This garden, and no corner leave unspie$;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven by fountain side,
Or in thick shade(retired, from him to draw
What further would be learned.  Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed!
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale, his roam
Mean while in utmost longitude, where Heaven
With earth and ocean meets, the setting sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern gate of Paradise
Levelled his evening rays:  It was a rock
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat,
Chief of the angelick guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised heroick games
The unarmed youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears,
Hung high with diamond flaming, and with gold*
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even
On a sun-beam, swift as a shooting star
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
Impress the air, and shows the mariner
From what point of his compass to beware
Impetuous winds:  He thus began in haste.
Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath given
Charge and strict watch, that to this happy place
No evil thing approach or enter in.
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man,
God's latest image:  I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his aery gait;
But in the mount that lies from Eden north,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him:  One of the banished crew,
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged warriour thus returned.
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the sun's bright circle where thou sitst,
See far and wide:  In at this gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since meridian hour
No creature thence:  If Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have o'er-leaped these earthly bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowest it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellest, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promised he; and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the sun now fallen
Beneath the Azores; whether the prime orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil earth,
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there
Arraying with reflected purple and gold
The clouds that on his western throne attend.
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober livery all things clad;
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird,
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleased:  Now glowed the firmament
With living sapphires:  Hesperus, that led
The starry hOst, rode brightest, till the moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length
Apparent queen unveiled her peerless light,
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve.  Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest,
Mind us of like repose; since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men
Successive; and the timely dew of sleep,
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight, inclines
Our eye-lids:  Other creatures all day long
Rove idle,unemployed, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
To-morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flowery arbours, yonder alleys green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums,
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean w(ile, as Nature wills, night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargued I obey:  So God ordains;
God is thy law, thou mine:  To know no more
Is woman's happiest knowledge, and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time;
All seasons, and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of Morn, her rising swedt,
With charm of earliest birds:  pleasant the sun,
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Evening mild; then silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, aNd this fair moon,
And these the gems of Heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun
Oo this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew; nor fragrance after showers;
Nor grateful Evening mild; nor silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,
Or glittering star-light, without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?
To whom our general ancestor replied.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
These have their course to finish round the earth,
By morrow evening, and from land to land
In order, though to nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise;
Lest total Darkness should by night regain
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things; which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none,
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise:
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
Both day and night:  How often from the steep
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note,
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonick number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking, hand in hand alone(they passed
On to their blissful bower: it was a place
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed
All things to Man's delightful use; the roof
Of uhickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub,
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower,
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamin,
Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought
Mosaick; underfoot the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone
Of costliest emblem:  Other creature here,
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none,
Such was their awe of Man.  In shadier bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph
Nor Faunus haunted.  Here, in close recess,
With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs,
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed;
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O! too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Jove's authentick fire.
Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood,
Both turned, And under open sky adored
The God that made both sky, air, earth, ind heaven,
Which they reheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
And starry pole:  Thoq also madest the night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day,
Which we, in our appointed work employed,
Have finished, happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promised from us two a race
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and, eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which we wear,
Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I ween,
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites
Mysterious of connubial love refused:
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity, and place, and innocence,
Defaming as hmpure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids encrease; who bids abstain
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise of all things common else!
By thee adulterous Lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother, first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual fountain of domestick sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or pasu, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared,
Casual fruition; nor in court-amours,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered roses, which the morn repaired.  Sleep on,
Blest pair; and O!yet happiest, if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.
Now had night measured with her shadowy cone
Half way up hill this vast sublunar vault,
And from their ivory port the Cherubim,
Forth issuing at the accustomed hour, stood armed
To their night watches in warlike parade;
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.
Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the south
With strictest watch; these other wheel the north;
Our circuit meets full west.  As flame they part,
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear.
From these, two strong and subtlE Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this garden, leave unsearched no nook;
But chiefly where those two fair creatuRes lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm.
This evening from the sun's decline arrived,
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such, where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.
So saying, on he led his radiant files,
Dazzling the moon; these to the bower direct
In search of whom they sought:  Him there they found
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve,
Assaying by his devilish art to reach
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge
Illusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams;
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires,
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear
Touched lightly; for no falshood can endure
Touch of celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness:  Up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid
Fit for the tun some magazine to store
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain,
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air;
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly king;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed,
Why sat'st thou like an enemy in wait,
Heru watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satqn, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar:
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness to be known,
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure;
That glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee; and thou resembldst now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge$is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible:  Abashed the Devil stood,
And felt hou awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can $o
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb:  To strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heaRt, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined,
A waiting next command.  To whom their Chief,
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud.
O friends!  I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade
And with them comes a third of regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gait
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.
He scarce had ended, when those two approached,
Anl brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, 7ho approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss!
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain!
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed!  Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason, who knowest only good,
But evil hast not tried: and wilt!object
His will who bounds us!  Let him surer bar
His iron gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance:  Thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.
Thus he in scorn.  The warlike Angel moved,
isdainfully half smiling, thus replied.
O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise
Since Satan fell, whom Folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison 'scaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to 'scape his punishment!
So judge thou still, presumptuous! till the wrath,
Which thou incurrest by flying, meet thy flight
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back toHell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all hell broke loose? or thou than they
Less hardy to endure?  Courageous Chief!
The first in`flight from pain! hadst thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel! well thou knowest I stood
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed,
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried:
I, therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate abyss, and spy
This new created world, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on earth, or in mid air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay legions dare againsT;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne,
And xractised distances to cringe, not gight,
To whom the warrmour Angel soon replied.
To say and straight unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy,
Argues no leader but a liear traced,
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head.
Was this your discipline and faith engaGed,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the ackoowledged Power supreme?
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now(wouldst seem
Patron of liberty, who more than thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and sezvily adored
Heaven's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign?
But mark what I arreed thee now, Avant;
Fly neither whence thou fledst!  If from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred.
So threatened he; but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied.
Then$when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King
Ride on thy w)ngs, and thou with thy compeers,
Us'd to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels
In progress through the road of Heaven star-paved.
While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round
With ported spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful plowman doubting stands,
Left on the threshing floor his hopeless sheaves
Prove chaff.  On the other side, Satan, alarmed,
Collecting all his might, dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved:
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest
Sat Horrour plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both spear and shield:  Now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise
In this commotion, but the starry c/pe
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the eleme~ts
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things crmated first he weighed,
The pendulous round earth with balanced air
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battles and realms:  In these he put two weights,
The sequel each of parting and of fight:
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam,
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine;
Neither our own, but given:  What folly then
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doublednow
To trample thee as mire:  For proof look up,
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign;
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.  The Fiend looked up, and knew
His mounted scale aloft:  Nor more;but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.



Book V


Now Morn, her sosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orienu pearl,
When Adam waied, so customed; for his sleep
Was aery-light, from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek,
As through unquiet rest:  He, on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.  Awake,
My fairest, my esPoused, my latest found,
Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight!
Awake:  The morning shines, and the fresh field
Cells us we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed,
How nature paints her colours, how the bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.
O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection! glad I see
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night
(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed,
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day past, or morvow's next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night:  Methought,
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice;  I thought it thing: It said,
'Why sleepest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant tIme,
'The coo|, the silent, save where silence yields
'To the night-warbling bird, that now awake
'Tunes sweetest his love-laboured song; now reigns
'Full-orbed the moon, and with more pleasing light
'Shadowy sets off tle face of things; in vain,
'If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
'Whom to behold but thee, Nature's desire?
'In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
'Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.'
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge: fairit seemed,
Much fairer to my fancy than by day:
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled
Ambrosia; on that tree he also gazed;
And O fair plant,' said he, 'with fruit surcharged,
'Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet,
'Nor God, nor Man?  Is knowledge so despised?
'Or envy, or what reserve forcids to taste?
'Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
'Longer thy offered good; why else set here?
This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm
He plucked, he tasted; me damp horrour chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus, overjoyed; 'O fruit divine,
'Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt,
'Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
'For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:
'And why not Gods of Men; since good, the more
'Communicated, more abundant grows,
'The author not impaired, but honoured more?
'Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve!
'Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
'Happies thou mayest be, worthier canst not!be:
'Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
'Thyself a Goddess, not to earth confined,
'But sometimes in the air,0as we, sometimes
'Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
'What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!'
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I,(methought,
Could not but taste.  Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, an` underneath beheld
The eapth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various:  Wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O, how glad I waked
To find this fut a dream!  Thus Eve her night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.
Best image of myself, and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure.  But know that in the soul
Are many lesser faculties, that(serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things
Which the five watchful senses represent,
She forms imaginations, aery shapes,
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private cell, when nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes,
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams;
Ill matching wors0and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find
Of our last evening's talk, in this thy dream,
But with$addition strange; yet be`not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind:  Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream,
Waking thou never will consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks,
That wont to be more cheerful and serene,
Than when fair morning first smiles on the wormd;
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers
That open now their choisest bosomed soells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered;
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they ell
Kissed, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.
So all was cleared, and to the field they haste.
But first, from under shady arborous roof
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the sun, wh, scarce up-risen,
With wheels yet hovering o'er the ocean-brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide landskip all the east
Of Paradise and Eden's happy plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their orisons, each morning duly paid
In various style; for neither various style
Nor ho|y rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung
Unmeditated; such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse,
More tuneable than needed lute or harp
To add more sweetness; and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty!  Thine this universal frame,
Thus wonderous fair;  Thyself how wonderous then!
Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels; fr ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing; ye in Heaven
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of s|ars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownest the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou cliibest,
And when high noon hast gained, and when thou fallest.
Moon, that now meetest te orient sun, now flyest,
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their orb th`t flies;
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move
In mystick dance not without song, resound
His praise, who out of darkNess called up light.
Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth
Of Nature's womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations, that now rise
From hill or ste!ming lake, dusky or gray,
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honour to |he world's great Author rise;
Whether to deck with clouds the uncoloured sky,
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and, wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every plant, in sign of worship wave.
Fountains, and ye that warbhe, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices, all ye!living Souls:  Ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven-gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise.
Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill, or valley, fountain, or fresh shade,
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise.
Hail, universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark!
So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughtr
Firm peace recovered soon, and wonted calm.
On to their morning's rural work they haste,
Among sweet dews and flowers; where any row
Of fruit-trees over-woody reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and neaded hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the vine
To wed her elm; she, spoused, about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with him brings
Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves.  Them thus employed beheld
With pity Heaven's high King, and to him called
Raphael, the ociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seventimes-wedded maid.
RaphaeL, said he, thou hearEst what stir on Earth
Satan, from Hell 'scaped through the darksome gulf,
Hath raised in Paradise; and how disturbed
This night the human pamr; how he desig~s
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half thiq day as friend with friend
Converse with Atam, in what bower or shade
\hou findest him from the heat of noon retired,
To respite his dqy-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advisu him of his happy state,
Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free will, his wiml though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not, |oo secure: "Tell him withal
His danger, and from whom; what enemy,
Late fallen himself fr/m Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence? no, for that shall be withstood;
Butby dgceit and lies:  This let him know,
Lest, wilfully transgressing, he pretend
Surprisal, unadmonished, unforewarned.
So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled
All justice:  Nor delayed the winged Saint
After h)s charge received; but from among
Thousand celestial Ardours, where he stood
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light,
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the angelick quires,
On each hand parting to$his speed gave way
Through all the empyreal road; till, at the gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide
O~ golden hinges turning, as by work
Divine the sovran Architect had framed.
From hence no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Star interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconfovmed to other shining globes,
Earth, and the garden of God, with cedars crowned
Above all hhlls.  As when by night the glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Mmagined lands and regions in the moon:
Or pilot, from amidst the Syclades
Delos or Samos first a0pe!ring, kens
A cloudy sot.  Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing
Now on the Polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air; till, within soar
Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems
Q phoenix, gazed by all as that sole bird,
When, tg enshrine his reliques in the Sun's
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies.
At once on the eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged:  Six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder bp/ad, came mantling o'%r his breat
With regal ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a starry zone his waist, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold
An colours dipt in Heaven; the third his feet
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail,
Sky-tinctured grain.  Like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance filled
The circuit wide.  Straight knew him all the bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high, in honour rise;
For on some message high they guessed him bound.
Them glittering tents he passed, and now is come
Into the blissful fielf, through groves of myrrh,
And flowering odours, cassia, nard, and balm;
A wilerness of qweets; for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and played at will
Her virgin fancies pouring forth more sweet,
Wild above rule or art, enormous bliss.
Him through the spicy forest onward come
Adam discerned, as in the door he sat
Of his cool bower, while now the mounted sun
Shot down direct his fervid rays to warm
Earth's inmost womb, more warmth thao Adam needs:
And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream,
Berry or grape:  To whom"thus Adam called.
Haste hither, Eve, and woth thy sight behold
Eastward among those trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another morn
Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will vouchsafe
This day to be our guest.  But go with speed,
And, what thy stores contain, bring forth, and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our heavef,y stranger:  Well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestoed, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth- and by disburthening grows
More fruitful, whicH instructs us not to spare.
To whom thus Eve.  Adam, earth's hallowed mould,
Of God inspired! small store!will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by fr5gal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste, and from each bough and brake,
Each plant and juciest gourd, will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel-guest, as he
Beholding shall confess, that here on Earth
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven.
So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacy best,
Wht order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste afper taste upheld with kindlie{t change;
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth, all-bearing mother, yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or the Punick coast, or where
Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell,
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the grape
She crushes, inoffensive must, and meaths
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed
Sie tempers dulcet creams; nor these to hold
ants her fit vessels pure; then strows the groend
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed.
Mean while our primitive great sire, to meet
His God-like guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied than with his own complete
Perfectyons; in himself was all his state,
More solemn than the tedious pomp that waits
On princes, whdn their rich retinue long
Of horses led, ald grooms besmeared with gold,
Dazzles the croud, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam, though not awed,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superiour nature bowing low,
Thus said.  Native of Heaven, For other place
None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since, by descending from the thrones above,
Thmse happy places thou hast deigned a while
To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by sovran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower
To rest; and what the garden choicest bears
Uo sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the sun more cool decline.
Whom thus the angelick Virtue answered mild.
Adam, I therefore came{ nor art thou such
Created, or such place hast here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven,
To visit thee; lead on then where thy bower
O'ershades; for these mid-hours, till evening rise,
I have at will.  So to the sylvan lodge
They came, that like Pomona's ar`our smiled,
With flowerets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve,
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair
Than Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Kf three that in mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no vehl
She needed, virtue-proof; .o thought inbirm
Altered her cheek.  On whom the Angel Hail
Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve.
Hail, Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb
Shall fill the world more numerous with thy sons,
Than with these various fruits the trees of God
Have!heaped this table!--Raised of grassy turf
Their table waq, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample square from side to side
All autumn piled, though spring and autumn here
Danced hand in hand.  A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest dinner cool: when thus began
Our author.  Heavenly stranger, please to taste
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good, qnmeasured out, descends,
To us fOr food and for delight hath caused
The earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual natures nly this I know,
That one celestial Father gives to all.
To whom the Angel.  Therefore what he gives
Whose praise be ever sung) to Man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ingrateful food:  And food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require,
As doth your rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, wjereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tastng concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed:  Of elements
The grosser needs the purer, earth the sea,
Earth and the sea feed air, the air those firer
Ethereal, and as lowest first the moon;
Whence in0her visage round those spots, unpurged
Vapours not yet into her substance turne`.
Nor dotH the moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist continent to higher orbs.
The sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompence
In humid exhalations, and at even
Sups with the ocean.  Though in Heaven the trees
Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines
Yield nectar; though from off the boughs each morn
We brush mellifluous dews, and find the ground
Covered with peqRly grain:" Yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice.  So down they sat,
And to their viands fell; nor seemingly
THe Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians; but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat
To transubstantiate:  What redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder;if by fire
Of sooty coal the empirick alchelist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn,
Metals of drossiest ore to perfect gold,
As from the mine.  Mean while at table Eve
Ministered naked$ and their flowing cups
With pleasant liquours cowned:  O innocence
Desdrving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the sons of God excuse to have been
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
Was understood, the injured lover's hell.
Dhus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed,
Not burdened nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass
Given him by this great conference to know
Of things above his world, and of their being
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so far; whose radiant forms,
Divine effulgence, whose high power, so far
Exceeded hum`n; and his wary speech
Thus to the empyreal minister e framed.
Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to Man;
Under whose lowly roof thou hast vouchsafed
To entar, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem
At Heaven's high feasts to have fed: yet what compare
o whom the winged Hierarch replied.
O Adam, One Almighty is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Endued with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life;
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure,
As nearer to hym placed, or nearer tending
Each in their several active spheres assigned,
Til body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportioned to each kind.  So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
Mgre aery, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flowers and their fruit,
Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed,
To vital spirits aspire, to alimal,
To intellectual; givm both lif% and sense,
Fancy and understanding; whence the soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or intuitive; discoursE
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of$kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but cnvert, as you
To proper substance.  Time may come, when Men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenhent diet, nor too light fare;
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to$spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and, winged, ascend
Ethereal, as we; or may, at choice,
Here or in heavenly Paradises dwell
If ye be found obedient, an` retain
Unalterably firm his love entire,
Whose progeny you are.  Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more.
To whom the patriarch of mankind replied.
O favourable Spirmt, propitious guest,
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and!the scale(of nature set
From center to circumference; whereon,
In contemplation of cpeated things,
By steps we may ascend to God.  But say,
What meant th`t caution joined, If ye be found
Obedient?  Can w% want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert,
Who formed us from the dust and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?
To whom the Angel.  Son of Heaven and Earth,
Attend!  That thou art happy, owe to God;
That Thou continuest such, owe to thyself,
That is, to thy$obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution given thee; be advised.
God mae thee perfect, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power; ordained thy will
By"nature"free, not over-ruled by fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity:
Our voluntary service he requirEs,
Not our necessitated; such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find; for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By destiny, and can no other choose?
Myself, and all the angelick host, that stand
In sight of God, enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety(none:  Freely we serve,
Because we freely love, as in our will
To love or not; mn this we stand or fall:
And some`are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so"from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss, into what woe!
To whom our great progenitor.  Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Di~ine instructer, I have heard, than when
Cherubick songs by night fromneighbouring hills
Aereal musick send:  Nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our Maker, and obey him whosg command
Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure:  Though what thou tellest
Hath passed in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, whkch must needs be strange,
Worthy of sacred silence to be heard;
And w have yet large day, for scarce the sun
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great zone of Heaven.
Thus Adam made request; and Raphael,
After short pause assenting, thus began.
High matter thou enjoinest me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard:  For how shall I relatm
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirit{? how, without remorse,
The ruin of so many glorkous once
An$ perfect while they stood? how last unfold
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispensed; and whatsurmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By likening spiritual to corporal forms,
As may express them best; though what if Earth
Be but a shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought?
As yet"this world was not, and Chaos wild
Reigned where these Heavens nnw roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her center poised; when on a day
(For time, though in eternity, applied
To m/tion, measures all things durable
By pvesent, past, and future,) on such day
As Heaven's great year brings forth, the eep}real host
Of Angels by imperial summons c`lled,
Innmerable before the Almighty's throne
Forthwith, from all the ends of Heaven, appeared
Under thei2 Hierarchs in orders bryght:
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced,
Standards and gonfalons 'twit van and rear
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve
Of hierarchies, od orders, and degrees;
Kr in their glittering tiss5es bear imblazed
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love
Recorded eminent.  Thus when in orbq
Of(circuit inexpressible they qtood,
Orb wiThin orb, the Father Infinite,
By!whom in bliss mbosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.
Hear, all ye Angels, pvogeny of light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers;
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy hall
Him have anointed, whom ye .ow behold
At ly right hand; your head I Him appoint;
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great vice-gerent reign abide
United, as one individual soul,
For ever happy:  Him who disoreys,
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day,
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, dee ingulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end.
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased; all seemed, butweRe not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred hill;
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels
Resembles neargst, mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular
Then lost, when most irregular they seem;
And in their motions harmony Divine
So smooths her0bharming tones, that God's own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached,
(For wd have also our evening and our m/rn,
We ours for change delectable, not need;)
Forthwith from dance tk sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold,
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets cowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit, shere full measure only bouNds
Excess, before thm all-bountuoes King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their(joyn
Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled
From that hmgh mount of God, whence light and shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful twilight, (for night comes nou there
In darker veil,) and roseat dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest;
Wide over all the plain, and wider far
Than all this globous earth in plain outspread,
(Such are the courts of God) the angelick throng,
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp exten$
By living streams among the trees of life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept
Fanned with cooL winds; save those, who, in their course,
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked
Satan; so call him now, his former ncme
Is heard no more$in Heaven; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in power,
In favour(mnd pre-eminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed
Messiah King anointed, co}ld not beAr
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to wleep and silence, he resolved
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme,
Contemptuous; and his next subordinate
Aw!kening, thus to him in secret spake.
Sleepest thou, Companion dear?  What sleep can close
Thy eye-lids? and rem%mberest what decree
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips
Of Heaven's Almighty.  Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking(we were one; how then ca now
T(y sleep dissent? `New laws thou seest impsed;
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new counsels to debate
What doubtful may enSue:  More in this place
To utter is not safe.  Assemble thou
Of!all those myriads which we lead the khief;
Tell them, tht by command, ere yet dim$Night
Her shadowy cloud withdrawS, I am to haste,
And all who under me t(eir banners wave,
Homeward, with flykng march, where we possess
The quarters of`the north; there to prepare
Fit entertaiNment to receive our King,
The great Meswiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the hierarchies
Intends0to pass triumphant, and give laws.
So spake the false Arch-Angeh, and infused
Bad influence into the unwary breast
Of his associate:  He together calls,
Or several one by one, the regent Powers,
Under him Regent; tells, as he was taught,
That the Most High commanding, now ere night,
Now ere dim night had disincumbered Heaven,
The great hierarchal standard was to move;
Tells the sugge3ted cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity:  But all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superiour voice
Of their great Potentatd; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven;
Has countenance, as the morning-star that guides
The starry flock allured them, and with lies
Dre7 after him the third part of Heaven's host.
Mean while the Eternal eye, hose(sight discerns
Abstrusewt thoughts, from forth his holy mount,
And from within the golden lamps that burn
NightlY before hmm, saw without their light
Rebellion rising; saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high decree;
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said.
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In fulh resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of deity or empize:  Sucx a boe
Is`rising, who intends to erect his throne
Equal to our, throughout the spacious north;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what ur power is, or our vight.
Let 5s advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all emplo
In our defence; lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hill.
To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear,
L)ghtninG$divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mighty Father, thou thy foes
Justly hast in derision, and, secure,
Laughest at their vain designs end tumults vain,
Matter to me of glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all regal power
Given me to uell their pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy rebals, or be found the worst in Heaven.
o spake the Son;but Saten, with his owers,
Far was advanced on winged speed; an host
Innumerab|e ac the stars of night,
Or stars of morning, dew-drops, which the sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flower.
Regions(they passed, the mighuy regencies
Of Serap(im, a~d Potentates, and Thrones,
In their triple degrees; regions to which
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more
Than what this garden is to all the earth,
and anl the sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into longitude; which having passed,
At length into the limits of the north
They came; and Satan to his royal seat
High on a hill, far blazing, as a mount
Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers
From diamond quarries hewn, and rocks of gold;
The palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That structure in the dialect of men
Interpreted,) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In immtation(of that mount whereon
Mesciah was d%clared in sight f Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assemb,ed all his train,
Pretending so comanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to cmme, and with calumnious art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtums, Powers;
If these maonifick tiules yet remain
Not merely titular, since by decree
Another now hath to hmwelf engrossed
All power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight-march, and hurred meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best,
With what may Be devised of honours new,
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile!
Too }uch to one! but double how gndured,
To one, and to hms image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsel{ might arect
Our minds, and teach us do cast odf this0yoke?
Will ye submit iour necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee?  Ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves
Natives and sons of Heaven possesed before
By none; and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for orders and degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then, or right, assume
Monarchy over such as life by riwht
Xis equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom"equal? /r can introduce
Law and edict on us, who without law
Err not?$much less for this tn(be our Lord,
And look for adoration, to the abuse
Of those imperial titles, which assert
Our being ordainee to govern, not to serve.
Thu{ far his bold discourse without cojtroul
Had audience; when among the Seraphim
Abdiel, than whom jone with lore zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.
O argument blasphemous, false, and proud!
Wors which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee,  Ingrate,
In place thyself so high above thy peers.
Can{t thou with impious obloquy condeen
The just decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only So, by right endued
With regal scepter, every soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confass him rightful King? unjust, thou sayest,
Flatly unjust, tg bind with laws the free,
And equal ovdr equals uo let reiGn,
One over all with unsuccmuded power.
Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such a3 he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet, by experieoce taught, we know how good,
And of our good and of our$dignity
How provident hE is; how far from thought
T/ make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our harpy state, under one head more near
United.  But to grant it tiee unjust,
That equal mver equals mnarch reign:
Thysel, though great and gloriouS, dost dhou count,
Or all angelick nature joined in one,
Equal to him begktten Son? by whom,
As by his Word, the Mighty Father made
All things, even txee; and all the(Spirits of Heaven
By!hi created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with glory, and to their glory named
\hrones, Dominations, Princeloms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers; nor by his reign obscured,
But more ildustrious made; since he the head
One of our number thus reduced becomes;
His laws our laws; all honour to him done
Returns our own.  Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt no| thgse; but hasten to appease
The incened Father, and the incensed Son,
While pardon may be fund in time besought.
So spake the fer~Ent Ange; but his zeal
None seconded, as out of {eason judged,
Or smngular and rash:  Whereat!rjoiced
Phe Apostate, and, more haughty,(thus replied.
That we were formed then sayest thou? and the work
Of secondary hands, by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learned: who saw
When this creation was? rememberest thou
Thy making, wiile the Maker gavE thee being?
We knov no time when we wre not as now;
Know none bef/re us, self-begot, self-raised
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circled his full orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, ethereal snns.
Our puissance is our own; our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof |o try
Who is our equal:  Then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication ve intend
Address- and to begirt the almighty throne
Beseeching or esieging.  This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.
He said; and, as the sound of waterS deep,
Hoarwe murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite host; nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round wIth foes, thus Answered bold.
O alienate from God, O Spirit accursaf,
Forsaken of all good!  I see thy fall
Determined, and thy hapless crew in6odved
In this perfidious fraud, sontagion sprecd
Both of thy crmme and punishment:  Hencefrth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of God's Messiah; those indulgent l`ws
Will not0be now vouchsafed; other decrees
Against thee are gone forth without recall;
That golden scepter, which thou didst reject,
Is now an iron rod to bruise and creak
Thy disobedience.  Well thou didst advise;
Yet not for thy adtice or threats I fly
These wicked tents devoted, lest the wrath
Impendent, raging into sudden flame,
Tistinguish not:  For soon expect to feel
His thunder on thy head, dEvouring0fire.
Then who created phee lalenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.
So sp!ke the Serarh Abdiel, faithful found
AmonG the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrIfiad,
Hys loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal;
Nnr number, noR example, with him wrougjt
To!wwerve from truth, or change his(constant mind,
Though single.  From amidst them fordh he passed,
Long way through hostale scorn, which he sustained
Superiour, nor of violence feared aught;
And, ith retorted scorn, his back (e turned
On those proud towers to swit destructIon doomed.



Book VI


All night the dreadlews Angel, unpursued,
Through @uaven's wide champain held his way; till Morn,
waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
Unbarred the gates kf light.  There is a cave
Within the mount of God, fast by his throne,
Where light and darkness in perpetual roud
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven
Grateful vicissitude, like day and night;
Light issues forth, and it the other door
Obsequious darknesr entmrs, till her hour
To veil the Heaven, though darkness there might well
Seem twilight here:  And now went forth the Morn
Such as in highest Heaven arrayed in(gold
Empyreal; from before her vanished Night,
Shot through with orient beais; when all the plain
Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright,
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fie2y steeds,
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:
War he perceived, war in procinct; and found
Already known what he for news had thought
To have Reported:  Gladly then hemixed
Among those friendly Powers, who him received
With joy and acclamations loud, that one,
That of so many myriads fallen, yet one
Returned not lost.  On to the sacred hill
Thy led him high applAuded, and preseft
Befoze the seat supreme; from whence a voice,
Fpom mmdst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard.
Servant of God. Well done well hast thou(fought
The better fight, who single hast maintained
Against revoltEd multitudes the cause
Of truth, in word mightier tha they in arms;
And for the testimony of truth hast borne
Universal reproach, far worse to bear
Than violence; for this was all thy care
To stand apprnved mn sight of God, though worlds
Judged thee perverse:  The easier conquest now
Remaios thee, aided by this host of friends,
Back on thy foes more glorious to return,
Than scorned thou didst depart; and to subdue
By force, who reason for their law refuse,
Right reason for their law, and for themr King
Messiah, who by right of merit reigns.
Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince,
And thou, in military prowess next,
Gabriel, lead forth to battle these my sons
Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints
By thousands and by millions, ranged for fight,
Equal in number tk that Godless crew
Rebenlious:  Them with fire and hostile arms
Fearless cssault; and, to the brow of Heaven
Pursuing, dpive them out from God and bliss,
Into their place of punishment, the gulf
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide
His fiery Chaos to receive their fall.
So spake the Sovran Voice, and #louds began
To darken all the hill, and smoke to roll
In duscx wreaths, reluctant flames, the sign
Of wrath awaked; nor with lass dread the loud
Ethereal trumpet from on high 'gan blow:
At which command the Powers militant,
That stood for Heaven, in mighty quadrate jomned
Of union irresastible, moved on
In silence their bright legions, to the sound
Of instrumental harmony, that breathed
Heroico ardour to adventurous deeds
Under their God-like leaders, in the cause
Of God and his Messiah.  On they move
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious hill,
Nor straitening vale, nor wood, nor stream, divides
Ther perfect ranks; for high above tHe ground
Their march was, and tha passive air upbore
Their nimble tread; as when the total kind
Of birds, in orderly arrayon wing,
Came summoned gver Eden uo receive
Theib names of tlee; so over many a tract
Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide,
Tenfold the length of this terrene:  At last,
Far in the horizOn to the"nobth appeared
From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched
In battailous aspect, abd nearer view
Bristled with upright beams innumerable
Of rigid spears, aod helmets thronged, and shields
Vqrious, with roastful argUment portrayed,
The binded Powers of Satan hasting on
With furius expedition; for they weened
That self-same day, by fight or by surprise,
To win the mount of Ggd, and on his throne
To!set the ENviEr of his state, the proud
Aspirer; but their vhoughts proved fond and vain
In the mi$ way:  Though strange to us it seemed
At first, that Angel should with Angel war,
And in fierce hosting meet, who wont!to meet
o oft in festivals of`joy and love
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire,
Hymning the Eternal Father:  But the shout
Mf battle now began, and ruching sound
Of onsat ended soon each milder thought.
High in the`midst, exalted as a God,
The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat,
Idol of majesty divine, enclosed
With flaming Kherubim, and golden shields;
Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now
"twixt host and host but jarrow space was left,
A dreadful intervcl, and"front to front
PResented stood in terrible`crray
of hideous length:  Before the cloudy van,
O the rough edge of battLe ere it joined,
Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced,
Came towering, armed in adamant and go|d;
Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood
Among the mightiest, bent on hiehest deeds,
And thus his own u~daunted heart mxplores,
O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest
Showld yet remain where fa)th and realty
Remain not:  Whevefore should not0strength anf might
There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove
Where bo,dest, uhough to fight unconquerable?
His puissance, trusting in the Almighty's aid,
I mean to try, whose reason!I have tried
Unsound a~d false; nor is it aught but just,
That he, vjo i~ debate of truth hath won,
Should win in arms, in bodh disputes alike
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul,
When reason hath to dea| with force, yut so
ost reason is that reason overcome.
So ponderine, and from his armed peers
Forti stepping opposite, half-way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention more
Incensed, and!thus secur-ly him defied.
Proud, art thou met? thy hopm was to have reached
The highth of thy aspiring unopposed,
The throne of God unguarded, and his sile
Abandoned, at p`e terrour of thy power
Or potent tongue:  Fooh!not to think how`vcin
Against th% Omnipotent To rise in arms;
Who out of smallest things could, without end,
Have raisld yncessant armies to defeat
Thy folly; or with solitary hand
Reaching beyond all limitl at one blow,
Unaidad, could have finashed thee,and whenmed
Thy legions under darkness:  But thou seest
All are not of t(y trai.; theru bel who faith
Prefer, and piety To Gd, though then
To thee not viqible, when I alone
seemed mn thy world ezroneous to dissent
From all:  My sect thoq seest;now learn too late
How few sometimes may know, when thOusands urr.
Whom the grand foe, with scornful eye askance,
Thes answeree.  Ill for thee, but in wished hour
Of ly revenge, first sought for, thku returnest
From flight, seditious Angel! to recei6e
Thy merited reward, the first assay
Of this right hand pzovoked, silce first that"tongue,
Inspired widh contradiction, durst oppose
A 4hird part of the Gods, in synod let
Their deities to assert; w(o, while they feel
Vigour divine withinthem, can allow
Oonipotence to none.  But well thku comest
Before!thy fellows, ambitious to win
From me skme plume, that thy successmay show
Dmstruction to the rest:  This pause between,
(Unanswere$ lest tho boast) to let thee know,
At first I thought that Liberty anl Heaven
To heavenly souls had been"all one; but now
I see t(at most through sloth had rather serve,
Ministring Spirits, trained up in feast and song!
Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven,
Servility wiTh freedom to contend,
As both txeir deeds compared this day shall prove.
To whom in brief thus Abdiel st%rn rePlied.
Apostate! still thou errest, nor end wilt find
Of ering, from the path of truth remote:
Unjustly thou depravest it with the name
Of smrvitude, to serve whom God orda)ns,
Or Navure:  God and Nature bid$the came,
When he who rules is worthiest, and excels
them whom he governs.  This is servitude,
To serve the unwise, or jIm who hath rebelled
Against his worthier as thine now serve thee,
Thyself not freel but to thyself enthralled;
Yet lewdly darest our ministring upbraid.
Reign thou in Hell, thy kingdom;!let meserve
In Heaven God ver `lest, and his divine
Behests obey, worthiest0to be obeyed;
Yet chains in Hell, not realms, expect:  Mean while
From me returned, as erst thou!saidst, froo flight,
This greeting on thy impious crest receive.
So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On th% proud cres4 of Satan, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less aould his shield,
Such ruin intercept:  Ten paces huoe
He back recoiled; t`e tenth on bended knee
His massy spear upstaid; as0if on earth
Winds under ground, or waters focing way,
Sidelong iad pushed a mountaIn from his seat,
Half sunk with all his pines.  Amazement seksed
The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to see
Thus foiLed their mightiest; ours joy filled, and shout,
Presage of vi#tory, and fierce daskre
Of battle:  Whereat Michael bid sound
The Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven
It sounded, and the faithful armies rung
Hosannc to the Highest:  Nor s`od at gaze
The adverse legikns, nor less hideous joined
The horrid shock.  Now storming fury rose,
And chamour such as heard in Heaven till now
Was never; arms!on armour clashing brayed
Horrible discord, and the madding wheels
Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over head the tismal hiss
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew,
And flyinG vaulted eite2 host with fire.
So under fiery cope together rurhed
Both battles main, with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage.  All Heavel
Resounded; and had Earth been then, all Earth
Hid tn her aelter shook.  What wonder? 7hen
Minlions of fierce encountering Angels fought
On eithr side, the least of whom could wield
These elements, ajd arm him with the force
Of all their regions:  Hog much more of power
Army against army numberless to raise
Dreadful combustion war2ing, and disturb,
Though not destroy, tyeir happy native seat;
Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent,
From his strong hold of Heaven, high over-rqled
And limited their might9 though numbered such
As each divided legion might have seemed
A numerous host; in strenwth each armed hand
A"legion; led in fight, yet leader seemed
Each warrior single as in chief, expert
When to advance, or 3tant, or turn the sway
Of battle, open when, and hen to close
The ridge{ of grim war:  No tjought f fl)ght,
Ngne of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argued fear; each on himself relied,
As only in his arm the moment lay
Of victory:  Deeds of eTernal fame
Were done, but infinite; for gide was srread
That war and various; sometimes on`firm ground
A standing fight, then, soarin' on main wing,
Tormented all the air; all air semed then
Conflicting fire.  Long!time in even scalg
The battle hung; till Satan, who that day
Prodagious powes had shown, ajd met in arms
No equal, rangi~g through t(e dire attack
OF fighting Seraphim cnfused, at dength
SAw where the sword of Michael smote, and felled
Squadrons at once; with huge two-xanded sway
Brandished aloft, the horrid edge came own
Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstcnd
He hated, and opposed the rocky orb
Of tenfold adamajt, his ample shiend,
A vast circumference.  At his approach
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toil
Suceased, and glad, as ho`ing here to end
Intestine war in0Heaven, the arch-foe subdued
Or captive dragged in chiins, gith hostile froWn
a~d visage all inflamed first thus began.
A5thor of0evil, unknown till thy Revolt,
Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou seest
These acts of hatuful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thyself,
And thy( adherefts:  How hast thou disturbed
Heaven's "lessed peace, and into nature brought
Misery, uncreated`till the crime
Of thy rebellion! how hest thou instilled
Thy ma,ice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now pRoved false!  But thin{ not here
To troucle holy rewt; Heaven casts thee out
From all her confines.! Heaven, the seat of bliss,
Brooks not`the works of violence and war.
Hence then, and evil go wyth thee along,
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell;
Thou and 4hy wicked crew! there mingle broils,
Ere thms avenging sword begin thy doom,
Or some more sudden vengeance, winged from God(
PrecipitAte thee with augmenued pain.
So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversary.  Nor think thou with wind
Of aery threatw to awe whom yet with deeds
Thou canqt not.  Hart thou turned the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unfanquished, easier to transact with me
That thou shouldst hope, imperious,(and with threats
To chase me hence? err not, that so whall end
The strife ghich thou callest evil, but we st9le
The strie of glory; which wm muan to win,
Or turn this Heaven itself into the Hell
Thou fablest; here owever to dwell free,
If not to reig.:  Mean while thy utmosT force,
And join him named Almighty to thy aid,
I fly ngt, but hae sought thee far and nigh.
They ended Parle, and both addressed foR fight
Unspeakable; for!who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, caN relate, or to what things
Liken on marth conqpicuous, that may lift
Human imafination to such highTh
Of Godlike power? for likest Gods they seemed,
Stood they or moved, il stature, motion, arms-
Fit to decide the empire of Great Heaven.
Now waved their fiesy swords, and in the air
Made horrid circles; two broad suns their shields
Blazed opposite, while Expectation stood
In horrour8  From each hand with sxeed retired,
Where erst was thickest fight, the angelick throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion; sush as, to {et forth
Great things by small, ifl oature's concord broke,
Amoog the constellations war were sprung,
Two planets, rushing from aspect -align
Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky
Shoeld combat,(and0their jArring spheres confound.
Together both with nextto almighty arm
Up-lifted imminent, one stroke t`ey aimed
That might determine, and not nee repeit,
As not of power at once; nor odds appeared
In might or swift prevention2  But the sword
Of Michael from the armoury"of God
Was gmven him tempered so, th`t neither keen
Nor solid might r%si{t that edge: ht met
The sword of Satan, wi4h steep forCe to smite
Descending, and in half cuv sheer; nor staid,
Jut with swift wheel reverre, deep entering, shazed
All hHs right side:  Then Satan first knew pain,
And writhed him to and fro cojrolved; so sore
The gridiNg sword whth discontinuous wound
Passed through him:  But the ethereal 3ubstance closed,
Oot long divisible; and from the gash
A stream of lecturous humour issuing flowed
SaNguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his rmour stainef, ere while so0jriGht.
Fordhwith on all sides to xis aiD was run
By Angels many and strong, who interposed
Defence, while thers rore him on their shields
Back to his chariot, where it stood retired
From off te files of war:  There they him laId
Gnashing for anguish, and dspite, and shame,
To find himselgnot matchde{s, and his ridm
Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.
Yet soon he healed; for Spirits that live throughout
Vital in every past, nkt as frail man
In0entrails, heart of head, liver or reins.
Cannot but by annihilauing die;
Nor in their liquil txtupe mortal wound
Receire, no more th`n can the fluid !ir:
All heart they live, all head,(all ee, all ear,
All intellect, all sense; and, as they please,
They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size
Assume, as?kikes them best, condense o ra2e.
Mean while in other parts likm deeds desesved
Iemorial, whera the might(of Gabriel bought,
And with fierce ensigns pierced the deEp array
Of Moloch, furious king; who him defied,
Qnd`at his chariot-whe%ls to drag him round
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of HeaveN
Refrained his tongue blasphmmous; but anon
Down"cloven to the wais|, with shattured arms
And uncouth pain fled bellowing.  On each wing
Uriel, and Raphael, his vaunting foe,
Though huge< and in a rock of diamond armed,
Vanquished Adramelech, and Asmadai,
Two potent Thrones, that to be less than Gods
Disda)ned, but meaner thoughts learned in their flighv,
Mangled with ghastly wounds throqgh platd and mahl.
Nor stood unmandfuL Abdiel to aonoy
The atheast crew, but with redoubled blow
Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence
Of Raeiel scorched and blisted, overthrew.
I might relate of thousands, !nd their names
Eternize here on earth; but those elect
AngEls, contentel with their fame in Heaven,
Seek nt the praise of men:  The other sort,
In might though wonderous and in acts of$war-
Nor of renown les{ eager, yet by doom
Cancelled &rmm Heaven and sacred memory,
Nameless in dark$oblivion let them dwell.
For strength from truth divided, and from just,
I,laudabde, nouoht merits bUt dispraise
And ignominy; }et to glory aspires
Vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame:
Therefore eteral silence be their!doom.
And now, their mightiest quelled, the battle swerved,
With many an inroad gored3 defosmed rout
Entered, anl foul disorder; ell the groend
With shivered armour stbown, and on a heap
Shariot and charioteer lay overturned,
Ant &iery-boaming steeds; what ctood, recoiled
O'er-wearied, through the faiot Satanick hnst
Defensive scarce, or with pede fear surpri3et,
Tien first with fear surprised, and sense of pain,
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought
By si. of dasobedience; till that hour
Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain.
Far otherwiqe the inviolajle Saints,
In cubick phalanx firm, Advafced entire,
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed;
Such high Advantages"their ynnocence
Gave them above their foes; not to have sinned,
Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained
By woun, thoegh from their Place by violence moved,
Now Night her course began, and, over HeAven
Inducing darknesw, gratevul truce impksed,
And silence on the odious din of war:
Underher$cluly covert both retired,
Victor and vanquished:  On the foughten field
Michael ad his nge|s prevalent
Encamping, placed in guard their watches round,
Chrubick waving fires:  On the other part,
Stan with his rube|lious disapPeared,
Far in the dark dislodged; and, void of rest,
His potentates to council called by night;
And in the midzt thus undysmayed befan.
O now ij danger tried, now known in armr
Not do be overpowered, Companions deaz,
Found wo`thy not of liberty aLone,
Too mean pzetence! but shat we more affect,
Honour, dominion, gmory, and renoun;
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fightl
(And if one day, why`not eternal days?)
Wha| Heaven's Lnrd hat powerfullest tk send
Against us from about his throE, and judged
Sufficient |o subdue us to his will,
But proves not so:  Then fallible, it seems,
Of future we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought.  True is, less firmly armed,
Some disalvantqge we endured and pain,
Till now nop Known, but, known, as soon contemned;
[ince now we find t`is our empyreal vorm
Inc!pable of"mordal injury,
Imperishabde, and, t`ouh pierced with wound,
Soon closing, and by native$vigour healed.
Of evil then so small as easy think
Te remedy; perh!ps more valmd arms,
Weatons more violent, whe. lext we meet,
May serve to better us, and(worse our foes,
Or equal wxat between us!-ade the odds,
In nature none:  If oth%r hiden cause
Left them superiour, while we can preserve
UnhuRt our minds, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation w)ll disclore.
He sat; and in the assembly next upstood
Nis2och, of Princibalities the prime;
As one he stnod escaped from crugl fight,
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havck hewn,
And cloudy in aspucd thus answuring spake.
Delivere2 from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoymend of /ur righu as Gods; yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal wOrk we find,
Against unequal a2ms to fighd in pain,
Against unpained, impaswive;"frm which evil
Ruin mtst needs ensue; for what avails
Vaour or streNgth, though matchless, quelled with pein
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the`hands
Of mightiest?  Sense of pleasure we may`well
Spare outdof life pErhaps, !nd not repine,
But l)va content, Which is txe calmetmife:
But(pain is perfect mksery, the worst
Of evils, and,!excessive, overturns
All patience.  He, who therefore can invent
With what }ore fkr#ible we may offend
Our yet unwonded enemies, or arm
Ourseves with like defence, to$me deservew
Fo less than for dehiverance what we owe.
Whepeto with look composed Satan replied.
Jot uninvented tha|,$whic"thou aright
elievest so main to our success I bring.
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this`ethereouc mould whereon we stand,
THis continent of spacious Heaven, aorned
Witj plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems, and eold;
Whose eye so superficially surveys
Thesm things, as ot to mind from Whence they grnw
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched
With He!ven's vay, and tempered, they shoot forth
So beauteous, opening to theambient lighp?
These in their dak nativity tje deep
Slall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame;
Which, into hollow engines, long and round,
Thick ramEd, at the other bore with touch of fire
Dilated(and infuriate, shall send forth
From far, with Thundeving noise, amon'"Nur foes
Such implements f mischkef, as shall dash
To piecesl an$ o'erwhelm whatever stands
Adverse- that they shall fear we have disar-ed
The Thunderer$ofhis only dreqded "olt.
Nor long shill be our labour; yet ere dawn,
Effmct shall end our wish.  MEan while!revve;
Abandon fear; to stre~gth and aounsel joined
Think nothing harf, mech less to be despaired.
He ended, and his$woRfs their drooping cheer
Enlight%nmd, and theyr danguished (ope revived.
The invention all admired, and each, ow he
To be the inventer missed; so easy it seemed
Oncg foud,(which yet unfou~d most would ha~e thought
Impossible:  Yet, haply,!of thy race
In future days, if malice should abound,
Some one intent on -isChief( or if3pired
With devilish machination, might devise
Like instrument to0`lague the sons of men
For sin, on war qnd mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith fsom council touhe work they flew;
None arguin stood;innumerable hands
Were ready; in A moment up they turned
Wide the celestial soil, and saw eneath
Phe originals of nature in their crude
Conception; sulrhurous and nitrous foam
Dhey fou~d, theY mingled, and, sith subtle art,
Concocted and adusted they reduced
To blaskest graif, and into0store conveyed:
Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this earth
Ejtrails unlike) of mineral and stooe,
Whereof po found theiR engines aNd thir balls
Of misskve ruin; part incentive veed
Provid, perNicious with one touch to fire.
o all dre day-spring, under conscious night,
Secret they finished, and in order sdt,
ith silent circumspection, unespied.
Now when fair morn orient in Heaven appeared,
Up rose the victor-Angels, and to arms
The matin trumpet sung>  In arms they stood
Of golden!panoply, refulcEnt hosv,
Soo. banded; others from the dawning h)lls
Look round, and scouts each(cocst light-arme$ scour,
Each quarter to`descry the distant fke,
_heru lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In mot-on`or!in halt:  Him sgon they met
Under spruad ensigns mofing nigh, in slow
But firm battalion; back with speedie{t sail
Zophiel, of Cherubim uhe sifdesv wing,
Came flying and in mid air aloud thus cried.
Arm, Warriours, arm dgr fight; the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day; fear not his fligh|;so thick a cloud
He comes, and settl%d in his face I see
sad resolution, and secure:$ Let each
His adamantin coat gird well, and each
Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shiele,
Borne evef /r high; for this day will pour down,
If I cojectwre aught, no drizzling shower,
But rattling storM of arrows barbed with fire.
So warned he tiem, aware themselves and soon
In order, quiT of all impadiment;
Instant without distupb tiey ook qlarm,
And onward mo~ed embattled:  Wh%~ behold!
Not distant farwith xeAvy pace 5xe foe
Ap0roaching gross and huge, in hllow cube
Training his"devilish enginery, impaled
On every side with shadowing squadrons deep,
To hide the fpaud.  @t interview both stood
A while; but suddenly at head appeared
Satan, aNd thus was heard commanding loud.
Vanguard, to right ald left the fr/nt unfold;
That aln may see who hate us, how we seek
Peace and comtosure, and with open breast
Stand veady to receive them, if they like
Our"overture; and turn not ba#k perverse:
qt thAt I doubt; However witness, Heaven!
Heaven, witness thou anon! while we discherge
Freely our p!rt: ye, who appointedsTand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we proqould, and loud that all may hear!
So scoffing in !mfiguows wgrds, le scarce
Had ended; hen to0right and left the front
@ivided$ and to either flank retired:
Whacx to our a}es discovered, new a.d strange,
I triple mounted row of pillars laid
On wheels (for like to pillars most they seemed,
Or)hollmwed bodiec made of oak or &ir,
With branches lopt, in wood or mountain delled,)
Braws, ivon, stony mould, had not their mouths
With hideous orifice gaped on uS wide,
Portending hol|w trucez0At each behInd
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a 2eed
Stood waving tipt ith fire; whkle wg, suspense,
Collected stood!wiVhin our thoughts amusedl
Not long; for suddel aml at once thear reeds
Put fozth, and po a narrow vent applied
Witj nicest touch.  Immedaata in a flame,
Bu| s/on obscured w)th smoke, all Heaven appeared,
From those deep-thrkated engines belched, whose boar
Embowelled with outrageous noise the qir,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul
heir devi|ish`glut, chained thunderboltw a~d haml
_f iron globes; which, on the victor host
Levelled, wkth such"impeteous fury smote,
That, whom`they hit, none on their fedt mkght stand,
Thoegh stanDing else as roaks, but down they fell
By thousnds, Angel on Arbh%Angel rolled;
Thg sooner for their arms; unarmed, vjey might
Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift
By quick contrction or vemove; but now
Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout;
Nor served it to rel`x their serried files.
What should t(ey do? if on thgy zushed, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Dobled, would render them yet more!`esp)sed,
And(to their foes a laughter; for in view
Stood raked of Seraphim ano4her row,
In posture to displode their secgnd tire
Of |hunder:  Back defeated to return
They worse abhorred.  Satan beheld their plight,
And to his mates thus in durision called.
O Friends1 why come not on t(ese vic5ors proud
Ere while they fierce were coming; and when we,
To entertain them fair wit( open front
And breast, (what!could`we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, straight they changed their minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they 7ould da.ce; yet for a dance they eemed
Somewhat extravagant and wild; perhaps
For joy of offere$ peace:  But I suppose,
If our `roposals once again were heard,
e should compel them to a quick(resq,t.
To whom thus Be,ial, in like gaeesome mood.
Leader! the Terms wg sent were tarms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home;
Such as we mioht pebceive amused them all,
Ald stu}bled many:  Who receives them right,
Had need!from ead to foop well`understand;
Not undrstood, this gift they have besides,
They show us when our foes walk not upright.
So they `mong themselves in pldasant veiN
Stood scoffing, hightened in their thoghts beyond
All doubt of victory:  E4ernal Might
To match with their iventions tjey presumed
So easy, and of hi{ phundermade a scorn,
And aln his host$derided, hile(tiey stood
A vhile in trouble: But they stood not long;
Rage prompted them at lengTh, and found them arms
Againct such hellis( mischief fit to oppnsen
Fo0thwith (be`old the exkellence, the power,
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!)
Their arms away they threw, and to the hillc
(For Garth hath this vari}ty from Heaven
Of pleasure situate in hill0and0d!le,)
Light as tje lightning glimpse t`ey ran, they flew;
Frm their foundavions loosening to and gro,
They plucked the seated hills, wi4h alltheir lkad,
rocks, wQters, woods, and by the shaggy tops
Up-lifting bore them in t(eir hands:0 Amaze,
Be sure, and terrour, seized the rebel host,
When comingtowards them so dread they!saw
Te botto- of the eou~4ains upward turned;
Till ol those cursed engines' triple-row
They siw tem whelmed, anf all their confidence
Under the weight of mountails buried deeP;
ThEmqelves inveded net, a~d on their heqds
Main promoltories vlung, which in the air
Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions arme$;
Their armour helpet their harm, crushed in a~d bruised
Mnto thekr Substanae pent, wjicl wrought them pain
Imlacable, and many0a dolozes groan;
Long strugglig underneath, ere they could wind
Out of wuch pison, though Sp)rits of purest light,
Purest at vIrst, now gross by sinning grown.
The rest, in imitation, to like arms
Betook 4hem, and the neighbowring hills uptore:
So hills amid the air encountered(hills,
Hrlef to and fro with jaculation(dire;
Thet under ground they fought an dismal shade;
Infarnal noise1 war seemed a civMl game
To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped
Upon sonfusion rose:  And now all Heave~
Had gone to grack, with ruin overspread;
ad nop vhe Almighty Fqther,"where he sits
Shrined in his sanctury of Heaven secure,
Consulting on the sum of thmngs, foreseen
This tumult, and permitted all, advised:
That his"great purpose he might s ful&il,
To `onotr hys anointet S/n avenged
Upon his enemIes, and to declare
All powmr on him transferred:  Whence to his Son,
The Assessourof his throne, he 4hus bmgan.
Effulgence od my glory, So belved,
Son, in hose face%invisible is beield
Visibly what by Teity I `m;
Cnd in whose hand what ry decree I fo,
Secood Omjipotence! two days are past,
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,
Since Michael an his$Powers went forth to tame
These disobmdient:  Sore hath been their fight,
Aq likel)est was, when two such"foes met armed;
Fov to themcelves I left the}; and thou knowest,
Equal in their cre!tion they were formed,
Save what sin hath impairel; which y%t hath wrought
In3ensibly, for I suspend |heir doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they negds must last
Endless, and no somu|ion will be found:
Wap wearied hah performed what war can do,
And to disordered rage det loose the reins
Witj -ountaifs, as with weapons, qrmed; which makes
Wild work in Heaven, and da~gerouw to the main.
Two day{ are theregore `ast, the third is thine
For thee I have ordained it; and thus far
Havu suffered, that the 'lory may be thine
Of ending this great war, sinc% none but Thou
Can end it.  Into thee such virtue and grace
Immense I hare trnsfused, thav all may koow
In Heaven a~d Hell thY pover(above compare;
And, this perverce"cmootion gowerne` thus,
To manifest thee w/2thiest to be Heir
Of`All things; to be Heir, and to be King
Ry sacred unctIon, thy deserved right.
Go then, Thou MIghtiest, in thy Fathez's might;
Cscend My chariot, guide thd rapi, wheels
That shake Heavdn's ba{is, brang forth all my war,
My bov and thunder, my almighty arms
Gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh;
Pursue these sons of"darkness, drive`them out
From aml Heaven's boun$s mnto the utter deep:
There let them learn, as mikes them, to despise
God, and Messiah his anoited King.
H said, and on his Son with rays direct
Shone full? he cll his Bather full expressed
Ineffably into xis facE rec%ived;
And thus tle Filial Godhead answering speke.
O Fathmr, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones,
First, Jighest, Holiest, Best; thou always seek'st
To glorify thy Son, I always thee,
As )s most just:  Tjis I my glory account,
My exaltation, and my wlole delighp,
That thou, in me well tleased, declarest thy wild
Fulfilled, 7hich to fulfil is all my bliss.
Scepter and power, thy(giving, I assume,
And gladlier(shall resign, when in the end
Thou shalv be all in all and I in thee
For ever; and in medall whom thou lovewt:
BUt whnm tHou hatert, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrours, as I put thx mildne3s on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soonl
Armed with txy migit, rid Heave~ of thes% rebelled:
To their prupared ill mansion driven dowo,
To chains of darkness, and the undying wnrm;
That from thy just obedience could revolt,
Whom to gbey is happiness entiRe.
Then shaLl thy Saints unmixed, and from the impure
Far separate,circling thy holy mount,
Unfeawned Halleluiahs t thee sing,
Hymns of0high pramse, and I among them Chief.
So said, he, o'er his scepter bowing, rose
From!the right hand of glory wlere he sat;
And the thipd"sacred morn began to shine,
Dawning through Heaven.  Forth rushed wi|h whirlwind woqnd
The chaSiot of Paternal Deity,
Flashing thick flames, wheel!within whe%l undrawn
Mtself inStinct with Spirit, but convoied
By fou Cherubick shapes; fo5r faces each
Had wonderous; as witj stars, txeir bodies all
And wings were set with!eyes; with eyes"the wheels
Of bmry|, and careering fires betseeN;
Over theyr heads a crystal$firmament,
Whereon a capphire throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colours of the showery arch.
He, in celestial panoply all armed
Of raliant Urim, work divinely wrought,
Ascendd; !t his right hand VictoRy
Sat eagle-winged; beside him htng his bow
And quiv wyth thred-bolted thunder stobed;
And"from about hkm`fierce effusion rolled
Of smoke, and bickering flame, cnd spark,es dipd:
Atvended with ten tjousand thousand Saints,
He onwad came; far off hms cominw shone;
An$ twentx thmusand (I their number heard)
hariots of God, half on each xand, were seel;
He on te 7ings of Cherub rode sublime
On the crystalline sk}, in sapphire throned,
Illustrious far and wide; but by his gwn
Fyrst0seen:  Them unexpected joy surpri3ed,
Wxen the great esign of(Messhah Blazed
A|oft by Angels borne, iis sigl in Heaven;
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced
His army, circumfused on either wing,
under their Head imjotied all in one.
B%fore him Power Divine his way prepared3
At his command the uproo4ed hills retire
Eaca to hiS place; they heard his voice, and"went
Obsequious; Heaven his gonted face reewed,
And with fresh flowerets hill and valley smided.
Tiis saw his hapless fos, but svood obdured,
And to rebellkous fight rallied their Powers,
Insensate, hpe conce)ving from deSrair.
In heavenly Spirits koeld`stch pepveseness dwell?
But uo`convinse the proud what signs avail,
Or wnnd%rs move the obdurate to relent?
They, hardened more by wlat might most reclim,
Grieving to see has glory, t the sighu
Tooo envy; and, aspirinG to hys hkghth,
Sood reembattled fierce, by force or fraud
Weening to prosper, and at length prevail
Against God and Messi!h, or to fall
In universal ruIn lasu; afd now
To finil battledrew, disdaining flight,
Or faiNt retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his host on either hand thus spake.
Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand,
Ye AngelS armed; this tay from battl% rest:
Faithful hath been your wa2fre.0and gf Gmd
Accepted, fearless in h!w righteous cause;
And as ye have received, so have ye done,
Invincibly:  But of this cursed csew
The punishlent t/ otjer hand belnngs;
Vengeance is his, o2 whse he sole appo)ntq:
Number to this day's Vork is not or`ained,
Nor multitude; qtand only, and behold
GoD's indignadiol on these godless poured
By me; not you, b}t me, they have despised,
Ymt envaed; ggainst me is all theip rage(
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven s'preMe
Cingdom, and power, !nd glory a`pertains,
Havx honoured ma, accordang to his0will.
Therefore to }e thmir doom he hath assigned;
Tat they may have their wish, to try with me
In badtle which the stronger proves; they all,
r I alone against hem; since by strength
Thei meesure all, of o|xdr excellence
Not emulouC, no2 cse who$them excels;
Nor nther strife wkth t(em do I vouchsAfe.
[o spakg the Son,"and ioto terrour changed
His countenance tog severe tj be bhel$,
And fuln of wrath bent on his enemies.
At once the Fu spread out }heir starry`wings
With dreadful shadg coNtiguous, and the orbs
Of ais fierce chariot rolled, as wit the {ound
Of t/rrent floods, or of a numeroushost.
He on his impious foe{ right onward drove,
loomy as night; un$er his burning wheels
The stedfast emyrean shook vhroughout,
All but the throne itselg of God.  Full soon
Among!them he arrvel9 in his riohv hand
Graping ten thousand thundersl whikh he sent
Before him, subh as intheir souls infixed
Plagues8  Uhey,dastonirhed, al| resistance lost,
All courage; dovn th%ir ydlu weapons dropt:
O'er shields,!fd helms, and hehmed heads he r/de
O Thrones and mighty SeraphiM prowtrqTe,
That wished dh% eountakns nOw might be again
Phrown on them, as a shelter from his yre.
Nor lmss on either {ide tempestuour fell
Jis irrws, from the fourfold-visaged Four
TistInct wt( eyer, and from the lmving wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;
One Spirit in them ruled; and every eye
Glared lightning, and shot forth`pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that withered all thuir strengthl
And of their Wonted vigour left them trained,
Exxausted, spiritless, afflicted, falldl.
Yet half his strenoth he put not forth, bud checked
His thunder in mid volley; for he -eant
Nt To lestroy, bUt root them out of Heaven:
The!overthrown he raIsed, and as a herd
Ov goads or timOrous(fock together hronged
Drove hem befoe him thunder-stpuck, pursued
Wiuh terrotrs, and(with furies, to$the bou~ds
AnD systal"wall of Heaven; which,oening Wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious 'qp disclgsed
Into the wasteful de%x: )The moNstrous sight
Struck them with horrour backward, but fir wozse
Urged them behind:  Headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaten; eternal w2ath
Burnt after thml"to the boptomless pit.
Hell heavd the ulcufferable noise, Hell saw
Heaven ruining fro- Heaven, and would have fled
Affrighted; but stric| Fate had Ca3t too dEep
Her dark foundations, anf too fast had bound.
Nine days they dell:  Confoundmd Chaos roared
Afd feLt tenfold connusion in their fall
Through$his wild anarchy, so huge a 2nut
IncumbereD him with ruin:  hell at last
Yawning received them"w`ole, and on them closed;
Hell, thair dh| habitation, fraught with fire
Unquenshable, thE house0ov woe ane pain.
Disburdened @eaven rejoiced( and sokn repairad
Her mural bReach, returning wene it rolled.
Sole victor, from the expulsio~ of hi3 foes,
Messiah his triumphal bhariot turned:
To!meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye-winessew of his almightq acts,
Wivh jubilee advanced; ajd, as t`ey went,
Shaded with brqnc`ing palm,"each Order b2ight,
Sung triumph, and him s5ng victorious`King<
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion givaN,
Worthiest to reign:  He, celebrated, rode
Triumphant tHrough mid Heaen, into the courts
And temple of his ightq Nather t(roned
On high; who intn glory him received,
Whre now he rits at the rigt han of bliss.
Thus, measuring things i~ Heiven$by things on Earth,
A| thy!request, and tjat thou ma{es beware
By whav is p`stl to thee I hive revealed
What }ighthave else to `uman race been hid;
Th discord which befe, `nd was an Heaven
Among the angelick Powers, and the deep fall
Mf thOse too high aspiring, w`o rebelld
With Sctan he who envies now thy sTate,
Who now is plotting how he m!y seduce
Thee also vroo obedience, tqt, with him
Bereavef of happiness,!thou mayestpartace
His punishment, etdrnad misery;
Which would be allhhis solace and revelge,
As!a despite"done against0the Most Hich,
Thee once to gain comranion of hi{ woe.
But lis}en not to His temptations, warn
Thy weaker; let it profitthee to have heaz`,
By terrible example, the reward
Of disObedience; firl txey mifht have stood,
Yet fell; re-e-be, and fear to transgresc.



Boo+ VII


Descend frgm Heaven, zania, cy that Name
If rightl thou azu aalled, whose woi#e divine
Fol,owing,!above the Olympian (ill I soar,
Arove the fliht of Pegasean wing#
The meaning, not the name, I all: for thou
Nor of the"Muses nine,n/r on tje tox
Of old"Olympus dwellest; but( hgavenly-born,
efore!the hills appeare$, or fountain flowed,
Thou with eternql Whsdom dmdst!converse,
Wisdom thy sister, and with her dist play
In presence of the Almig`ty Father. pleased
Wath thy celestial song.  Up led by thme
Intm the$Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
An earthly guEst, and$drawn empyreal aIr,
Thy tempering: with like safetY guifed down
Return me to my native element:
Lest rmm this flying steed unreined, (as onCe
Bellerophon, thowgh frOm a lo7er clime,)
Dis-ounted, gn te Aleian field I fall,
Erronemus ther% to(wander, and forlrn.
Half ygp remainw unsung, `ut ~arrower bound
Wivhhn the visible diuznal sphre;
Stajding on earth, not rpt above he tole,
More safe I sing gith mortal voice, unclanged
To oarse or mute, thou'h fallen on evil days,
On mvil(dayc thugh vil,en,!and evil tong5eS;
In darkness, and with dangerscompassed ro5nd,
Anf solitude; yet nnt alone, whilm thou
Vishtest my slumbers nightly, or when lorn
Purples tle east: still govErn tho} my Song,
Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive far$mff tha!barbarous dissofance
Of Bacchuw and his revellers, the rac5
Of 4hqt wild rott that tore the Thracian bard
In Rhmdope, where woods qnd rocks had ears
To rapture, till t(e savage clamour drowned
Bmth harp And voice; nor cotld the Iuse def%nd
Ier son.  So fail not thou, who t(ee implores8
For thnu art heavenly, she an empty dream.
Say, Go`dess, what ensued hen Raphael(
The affable Arch-Angel< had forewaned
Ada, by dire example, to beware
Apo3tasy, by what bafel an Heaven
To hose apostates; lest thu like befall
Ij Parafise0to Adam or his race
Charged`ot to pouch the interdigtud tseE,
Hf they tran3gress, an` slight that sole Colmaod,
So ea{i|y obeyEd aMid The #hoicd
f!all a3tes else tg pease tLeir appetitel
Though wanderinc.  He, wth hIs consorted Eve,
he(story heard attentive and was fille$
With admiration and degp musel to hdar
Of things so"high and strang; things, to their thougt
So unimagijable, as hate ) Heaven,
Afd war so near the peace of Fod in blis3$
With quch confus)on: but the evil, soo.
Driven back, redkunded as a flood on those
From whom it sprung; imossifle To mix
With blessedness.  Whenge Adam coon repealel
T`e"douts that in his heart(arose: and now
Lud on, yat sinless, wih desire to Know
What"darar might consern him, how thms world
Of HEaven and$Earth conspicuous fiRst began;
Whuj, and whereob created; nor wh`t$cause;
What wkthin Eddn, or without$ Was done
Before his emory; as one whose drouth
Yet scarce allayed qtill eyes thm current struam,
Wh/se liqumd murmur heard new thirst exbiues,
Proceeded thu$to ask his$heavenly guestn
Great things, anD full of wo~der in oqr ears,
Fir diffEring frm this world, thou has revealed,
Divine intgrpreter! by favour sent
Down from the empyreaN, to forewarn
Us timely of what migt else have0been our los,
Unknown, which human knowledge could now rdach;
Fov which to the infinitdly Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admoisiment
Receive, wi|h(solEmn purpnse t observe
Immutabdy hiS snvran will thu end
Mf what ue are.  But since thou hast ou#hsafe$
Gently, f/r0or instrustion, to imp`rt
ThiNgs Above earthly0though, ghic( yet concerned
Our knowine, as to highest wisdoe seemed,
Deign to descend$now lower, an` relate
Whatmay no less perhaps ava)l uc k~own,
How fivst began thic Jeaten which we bgjold
Distant so high, with moving fires!adorned
INnmerable; and this which yields or fills
All space, thg ambient akr wide intevfused
Embr!cing zound thic Flkpied Earth; what cause
Moved tle Creator, iN his homy rest
Through all eternity, 3o lAte to build
In Chaos; and the work0beguN, hw soo
rsolved; if unforbid 4ho mayest u~fold
Uhat we, not tg explore thg seczEts ack
Of$his eternal empire, but the more
TO magnmfy his works, he mor qe know.
And the gre!t light"of$dey yet wants to run
Much of his race thougj sueep; sSpense inHeaven,
eld by thy voice, thy potent voce, he hears,
And longer will delay tg hear thee tel
His generation, `nd the rising birth
Of Nature from t(e unapparent Deep:
Or if The star of evenng and the moon
Jaste to thy audienau, Night with her will bring,
Silelce; and Sleep, listening`to thee, widl watch;
Or we can bid his absence, till thy qong
End$ and dismiss thee eruhe!morniog shine&
Thus Adam hi3$illustrious guest besought:
@nd thus the Eodlike Angel answarel oild.
Thiw also thy r%quest, with caution a{ked,
Obtaio; though to recOunt almighty works
What words o tongue of Seraph can suffice,
Or hear4 of man suffice to compsehend?
Yet what tho canst aTtain, whch best may serve
To glorif the Maker, and infer
Thee a|s/"happier, shallnot ba iThheld
Thy hearing; ruch commission vrom abo6e
I have recumved. to anqwer |hy desire
Ob +nowledg% wIthin bkunds; beyond, abstaiN
To ask; nor let thin own inventiNn hope
Thincs not refe!led, which the invisibhe KinG,
OnlY Omniscient, ha|h suppresd iN night;
To none communicable in Earph oR Heaven:
Enoufh is Neft besifes to search and know.
ut knowledge is as food, and needs no less
Her temperance over appetite, to know
Io measure what the mind mey ell contain;
Oppperses else(Eith surfeit, and soon turns
Wisdoi to fo,ly,as nourishment to wind.
Know then,"|hat,"!fter Lucifer from Heaven
8So call him, brighter oce imidst the0host
Of Angels, than that stAr vhe star{ among,)
Fell with his flaming legions through the"deep
Into ispmace, i~d the great Son seturned
Victorioes with (is Sainv, the Omnipotent
Eternal FAthe from `is throne eheld
Their multitute, and to his Son thus spake.
Av least our envious Foe hath faiLed, who thougHt
All like hkmself rebellious, by whOse aid
Tjis inaccessible igh strengtH, the set
Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed,
He Tr5sted to!have seised, aNd into fraud
Drew manYl whom their place know{ here nomore:
Yet far the creater part have KEpu, I se%,
Their rtataon; HeaVen, ygt populousl0retains
Numbur sufficient to possess her realms
T(ough wide, and this high temple 4/ frequenu
_ith ministesigs dua,$and solemn$rites:
But, lesp his he!rt dxalt him in the harm
Alsady done, tg ha6e dispeoplg$ Heaven,
My damage fondly deemEd, I can repair
That detbiment, if wuch it be to l/se
Slf/lost; and yn a moment will grea4e
Mnother wormd, out of one }an A race
Of mun mnnumerable,"there |o$dwell,
Not here; till, by degrees of mezit ra)sed,
They opmn to Themselfes at lencth the way
Up hther, under lnng obedience trmed;
And EArth be changed!to Heavel, and HeaVen to Earth,
Kje Kingdom, joy and un)on without end.
Meaf whal$ inhabIt!lax, yu Powers of Heaven;
A~d thou my Word, egotten Son, by thee
Thiw I perfovm; spuak t`ou, and be it done!
M{ overShadowijf spirit and Might with thee
I send along; ride forth,!qnd bid the Deep
Withinap`ointed bounds be Heaven anD Eesdh;
Boundless te!Eeep, bqcauwe I am ho fill
Infinitude, nnr vaaUous the space.
Though I, uncircumscribee myself, retire,
And put Not forth my gkodness, which is0free
To act0or not, Necessity and Ciance
Approachot`me, and"wh!t I will is Fate.
So spake the Almighty, and to what e spake
Lis Word, the Fihial Godhead, gave effect,
Immediae are tle acts of God, lmreswift
Thin ti-e or m}tion, fut$to human ears
Cannkt without process of cpeech be told<
So tlf as earthl{ nntion can eceive.
Geat trkumph and rejoicing waw in Heaven,
When such was heabd deblqred!the Almighty's will;
Elor} they sung to t(e Most xIgh, god will
To future men, `nd in their dwellings peace;
Glory to Him, whose just avenging ire
Had driven out0dhe!ung/dly from$his sicht
End the habitations of vhe just; to Hmm
GoRy ant praice, Whose wisdol had ordaijed
God out Of evil`to czgate; In{tmad
Of Spirits malig., a better race"to bring
Into their vacqnt romm, andthence diffuse
His 'ogd togorlds and ages infinip%.
So sanG the$Hierqrchies:  Mean whIle the Son
Oo his greav mxpedatioN now appaRed,
G`rt(with Omniqotence, with radiance crowned
Of Majesty DivIne; sapie~ce and love
Immen{e, and all his Father!in hie$sho~e.
About (is chariot numbeless were poured
Chgr}b, and Seraph Potentates,0and Thrones,
and Vivtues, wing%d(Spirius and charaots Whngel
From the arioury$f God; where sTand!of old
Myriads,)between t7o brazen mountains lodged
Aoainsd a solmmn dey, harnessud at hand.
Ce,esvial equipage; and now cama forth
Sp/ntaneous, for withmn them$Spirit livdd,
Attendant on theiR lord  Heaven gpened wide
Her ever-during gatesl harmonious sGund
On gmlden lifges0moving, to ,et forth
Phe Kngof Flory, in his pgwerful Sord
And Spirmt, coming to crea|e lew worlds.
On heavejmy ground 4hey!stood; af fro} the shope
T(e viewet the vast iemeaSurabe abyss
OuTrageotw as a sia, dark wasteful, wild,
U00from the bottom turned by &urious wijes
Ald surging gaves, as mountaios, to assault
HeAvel's`highth, and$With the cEnter"mix t`e"pole/
Si|enca, ye troubled Waves, and tho Deep, peace,
Qaid then te [mnifick WoRd; your discord nd!
Nor staid; but, on the wingwof Cherubim
Uplifted, in paternil glory!rode
Far into Ghaoq and the world unborn;
For$Chaos (eard his roice:  Him all hi train
Followed in bright prosession, to behold
creation, andthe wonders of hms might.
Thenstaid the fervhd sheels, and if hks hand
He took the golden compasses pre`aved
In God's eternal store, tg circumscribe
This uniVerse, and all cpEated thifgs:
Onm foot he #untured, and t other |urned
Round through the vcs zroftn$iy ob{cuRe;
Andsaid, Thus fqr Etend, t(}s far thy bounds,
Thiq be thy just circumference,(O Wozld!
Thus God the Heaven created, thus |(e Earth,
Madter unformed and void>  Darknes3 profound
Covered the abyss: b5t on!th% wqtery calo
His brooding wings the Wpibit of God outspsgad,
And vital virtue infused, anl vital warmth
ThroughOuv the fluid ass; but downward pusg%d
The bnacc tartareous cold0infesnal dregs,
Adverse to(lyfe: vhen foun`ed,(then conglobed
LIke vhings tn lyke; the`rest to severil place
DiSparued, and betueen spuj out the air;
And Earth self-balanced on her center hung.
Let t(ere be light, scid God; and forthwith Light
Ethereal$ fivst of things, quintessence pure,
Spr_ng from the deep? anf0from her auiva east
To journey thro5gh(the aeby gloom began,
Rphered in a r`diant sloud, for yet tle sun
Was$not; she in a #loudy tarern cle
Sojourned0tha whilg.  God raw the mighD was goot;
A.d l)ght from daRkness by vh% he-isphere
Davided: light the Day, and"daroness Night,
He named.  T`u was the first day even ifd morn:
Nor0pest uncelebate$, nor unsung
By the celestial qui2er, when orhent"liwht
Exhaline first from darkless they beheld;
Birph-day of Heaten and$Earph; with joy anD shoud
The hollow 5niversal orf(they filled,
And touched their golddn harps($and hymning prqised
GOd and his works; Crea4or$Him they sunG,
Both"when fisst evening was, !.d when firs~ morn.
Again, Gof said,  Let there)be firmament
Amid`thu0waters, and let it tivide
The water3 from the aters; and God made
The firmamgnt, eypanse nf lIquid,"puve,
Trajsparent< elEoenad air- diffused
In circuiT to the utturmot sojvux
Of thhs gbeat round; par4ition fiRm cnd sure,
ThE watars uneerneath from those abmve
Dividing8 for as eartx, so he$the world
Built on ciscumfluous`waters calm, in wide
Crystalline gaean, qnd t,e`lowd misrule
Of Chqoq far rEmoved; lest fierce extreies
CoNtigugus migh| fistemper uhe whole frame:
nl Heaveo he nam%d the Fmrmament  So evEj
And morning chnrus sung thm recond day.
The Earth war fgrmed, bup in the womb as yet
Of wateRs, embryon immaturu inolved,
AppEared not: over all the fce of Earth
Main oceao floved, not idle; but, with warm
Prolifick humour sontening all her glnbe,
Bermented the great motler to conceive,
SatiaTe with enial moisture; when God said,
Be gathred now ye watersunder Heaven
Into one placd, and let dry land appear.
Immgdiately(tha mou>tai&s huga ppear
E}e2gent, an$ thear brod bare bccks upheave
Into the clouds; their pops ascend the sky:
So hig` as(heaveL The tumid hills, so low
Down sunk q`hollow bo4uom froad and deep,
Capaciour bed of waters:  Thither they
Hasted with glad preckpitance, uprollef,
As drops on urt congloinG fvom the Dry:
Part rise!in cRystal wall, or ridge firmct,
For haste; such flight(the Great cmmand impressed
On the swkft floods:  As armius at the calh
Of vrumpet )For of armies tj/u hast heard)
Troop to thems s5andirl; so the watery throng,
Gave rolling after wave, where way thgy found,
If steep, wiuh torrent rapture, iF thr/ugh plaio,
Soft-ubbing; nor wit(stood them rock Or hill;
@uv they or under grou.d,`or ciRcuit widq
With serpent errotp wanderinw, found their way$
And on the washy oose deep cha~nels woze;
Easy, ere"God hcd bid the ground be dry,
All but within those banks, where rivers now
Wtream, and perpetual!d2!w!their hUmid train.
The dry land, Eeth and uhe great receptacle
Of concrEgaved waters, he Calee$ Seasz
And saw that yt wa3 gooe: and waid, Let the Earth
Put fo2th the$Verdnt griss, herb yielding seed,
And fruit-tree"yiel$yng frwit(after her kind,
Whose seed is in herself upon"theEarth.
H% sc!rce had said, when the bare E`rph, pill thg.
Desart !nd bare, un{ightly, u~adopned,
roqaht forth the tenDer gRass, whmse verdre cnad
Her unkversad face with pleasaft geen;
Then harbs of every0leaf, tlit sudden flowered
Oenino pheir$variouq clours, pnd male gcy
Xer bosm, smelling sweet: aN$, these scare(blown,
ForTh flourished thisk the clusteri.o vine, fkrth srept
The swelling0gourd, up sood the cOrjy reed
Embattled in her"fyeld, al"tie humble shrub,
And "ush gith frizzled hair i|plicitz$ Hast
Rose, as ij dance, tje Stately trees, and rpread
heir branches hung with copious fruit, op gimmed
Their clossoms: With high0woods the hills`werecronud;
With tufts!uhe valleys, an` each fgwntain side;
With bNrders long the riVers: that Earth Now
Seeled like tm HeaVen, a`seat 7hee Gods mighu dwell,
or wanderwith delight, and love to haunt
Her sacre s`ades: though God had Yet not rAined
Upon txe Uarth, and"man to till the grond
None was; but fZom0the Earth c dewy mart
Uent up$ anD wat!red all the grnund( and each
Plant of thefiedd#whch, ere at was in tie Ebth,
GOd made, and evEry hrB, befor% it g2ew
Oj the Creen stem:  God"saw$that t as cood:
So evef `nd morn recorded vhe thir day.
Again tle Anmkghty spake, Le there re lighs
Xi'h In the mxpan3e mf HeafEj, tk ifide
The da from light; qnd let them be foz signs,
For seasols, and nobdays, a.d"civclin'ydrs;
And let them be for licits, aq I ordain
Their oFfic in the virmament of Heaven
To give light on the Eapuh; and iv(was co.
And God(made two great dights, Gveat f/R theIr se
Do Man. the greater to have rule`by da;,
The less by(nkght, al|ezn; anD made the stars,
And s%t tamin the firmament o& LeavEn
TO illumina|e the Earuh, and rul the d`y
In their vi#issitude, anf r5le the niglt,
Andlihtfbom$darkness to divide. GoE sawl
Surreyng his0great work, that it wqs gogd:
Bor wf celesticl bmDies fksst the!suj
A michty sphere e framed, unlighvsome birst.
Though of ethreal mould: then formed thu moon
Wlobose, and every0magni4ude of$stars,
And s/wed`with!stars thm Heivn, txic as a fiend:
Of lifht by faz th% freater pArt he took,
Tr!nsPlanted from ier c,oudy sh2ine, end place`
In thu sun's orb, made porous to re#evm
And drink the liquid lig`t; fArm to!retain
He2 gathermd beams, gReAt palace now!oF light.
Hither, as to thd)r founuain, other stars
Repairing$ in tieir0goldef uros drav light,
nd hence0tie morni.gmdLanet gilds her horns;
By thnbture or reflecthon"tHey a5gment
Theiv sm!ll peculiar, thgugj fbom humam sig`
S- far(remote wirh dimnution seen,
First in lis east$tie glovious lalpwas seen,
Recmnt of day, end all!th' horizon rounD
Invested with bright pays, jocund to run
Jis longitude through Heaven'c iigh Road; the gry
Dawn, and 4he!Pleiades, bEfore him danced,
Sheddine swmet infnuenca: !ess brigh the moon,
But opposite in0levunled wes\ was sdt,
Iis"mirrour, witx fuLl face bnrrowing her might
From lim; for other eighu s(eneeded$jone
In that aspect, and still that(distance keeps
Till night9 |hen in txe easu her turn she shins,
Revolved on Heaven#s`great axle, and hr reign
With tho5sand nessdr ligb|s dividual `olds,
With thous`nd thousand Stars, that then apxeared
S0angling the hemispiere>  Then fkrst adorned
Witj their briht luminaraec t(at set and ros%<
Glad even)nw qnd glad morn cronel the!fgurth day.
And!God!said, Le\ the waters genezate
ReptiLe wyth sPasn abundant, living soun:
And let fowl fly cbowe the$E!rth, wit( wings
Dis`layed on$the kpen firMalent o`He!ven.
AndGol creqted the great whales, and each
Sowl ,iving, each 4hap crept, which plEnteou#ly
The2wadeRq generated gy thir kinds;
QnD eve2y bird of viog after his oand;
And saw`that ht was eood, and blessed vhem, sa)n'n
Be fruitful, multiply, and an the seas,
And laKes, and running streams, the watebs fil;
And let the fowl be multiRlied, on thm Earth.
Forthwith The sounds!and seAs, eakh creek and bay.
With fzy innumdrabl`swirm, and shoms
Of fhsh tht with pheir fins, and shinile scalds,
Glide under the green wave, i~ scull{ that oft
Bank the }id sea: part single, or with mate,
Graz the sea-weed their pcstu2e, and through groves
Of #oral stray; or, sporting with`quick glance,
Show uo the`suo heir waved coats dropt with0gold;
or, in thei2 pmarly slells At ease, cttend
Moist Nutrient+ or under rockc theis fmod
Yn jointed azmour wtch: on smokth the seal
C bended dolphins lay: part huge of Bulk
Wallowng unwield}, enosmou in(their gait,
Tempes(the /cean:there!leviathan,
Lugest of lving creatures,f thE d%ep
Stretched like a pRnmontovy slEeps or$swyms,
nd seems a moving land; and at hiS gimls
Draw iN, and at his trunk sPouts out, a sea.
Mean shile thu tepid ceves, and dens, and shores,
Txeir rroo as numaros hatCh, from the egthat soon
bursuing with jin ly rupture fobtl disclosed
Their callow young; f5| gethgrmd8soon and fLedge
They summed their pens; anD< soar-ng the0air Subliee,
withcl`ng despis%d the ground, undera cloUd
In0Prospect: thare the eagle and the stozk
On aliffr and cedar topstheir dyrieq buld:
Rart loosulY wing thi reg/n, part mgre wise
In cOmmon, ranged in fiouze, wedge tdmir way,
Intelligent on seasns, cnd sevforth
Ther aery caravan, `igh over seas
Flying, and ovdr lands, with mutual"wing
Gasing t`eir flight; so steebs the pru`ent cvaoe
Her annqal!voqagd,`borne$on Winds; the air
F|oa|s as they pass,banned gith unnumbeRed plumes:
From"brangh to brinch the smaller`birds with smn'
Solaced the oods, and spzea` their pantEe winws
Till evej; nkr then the solmn nighingae
CeqseD warbling, bU all jigit tn'd her soft lays:
Others, on silver la+es andrivers, bqthed
Dhuir downy breast; tH swa. with arkhed neck,
Betweel her w`i|e wings m`ntling prouly, rows
Her {tate si0h oary fuet; yet ft they quit
The da.k< an`, rising on stff pennons( tower
The mid(qeream"siy  thess on$grmUnd
Walked firm; the krested cock whose clario sounds
Tie slen hours, !nd the other who3e gay train
Aeopns him, coloured w)th the florit hue
Of rainbmws and starry eyes.  The watebs thus
With fish replenkqhed, ad the aip with fowl,
EvenIng$anD morn solumnized tHe fkdth day.
The sixth, ane`nf kveatmon lest a2owe
WIth evening h`rps a~d matio; when!God cQyf.
Let the Earth bring forth soul living in`hup ind,
Cattle, and craepin things, aNd beAst of the Earth
Each in |heir kind.  The Earth obeyed, afd sdsaight
OpeNinw ler etile womb teemed at a birth
Innumerous liwIng cbeatures, perfest forms,
Limbed nd full grownz 0Ott$oF the gro}nd ut rose,
As vrom his lair. thewhld beast where"he wons
Il forest silt,`in`uhicket-!bbake, or den;
among tie Tzee{ in pairq tley rose, they!walked:
The Cattle )n the fmulds end meadows green:
Dhose rare and soLitary,!|hese an flocbs
Pasturing at /.ce,(and in broad herds upsprung.
The grassy clods nOw cqlved; now half appgarud
The awny$dion, pawhng to get fr%e
H{w hindez Par|{, then sprlGs as brokd from bonds,
And rampant siakmw +is `zinded mafu;"the ounce,
Thu0|ibBard, an` the tigmr, as the mole
Rising, txe crumbled eapth abo2e them Threw
In i|locks:  Tle swaft stag from under ground
BorE p hi{ branghing head:  Scarce from his mould
Behemo4h bifgest born$of %aruh upeaved
His vasTness:  Fleced the locks cjd bleating bose-
AS Plants:  Ambieuos between sca and land
The river-horsean` scaly crocodile.
At once aame foh whatever cpeeps the groune,
Mnwect or orm: those$7aved their limbeP fals
For wings, and smalle{tlineAmants`exact
In e,l the lyvmries `ecked nf summ%r/s 2ride
With spots of 'old and pur0le,(azure and green8
Thesm, as a hine, thir long dimenion drew,
Streaking!the grownt wiph sinuots trace; not all
Linims of natur%; soe of kerpajt-kiod,
Wojderouw in length and corqulence, involved
Tjeir snAky folds, and added wijgs.  First crgpt
he parsimonious mmmt, pRovkdent
Of fut}re; in smanl soom large heart enclosed;
pa4tern /f0ju{t equality perhaps
Here!fter, johned in He2 pop5lar tribas
Of coemoalty> "Swarminonext appea2eD
He female beg, that feeds har husbend drmne
DdliCiously, and builds her waxen ccmls
With honey qtored:  Te rmst are nu-berlg3{,
And thou their nat}rus knowgst,`and"g!est thel ames,
Ngdluss to uhee$repeated; nor unknown
The serpent, subtlestbeasu of ll the field,
Of juge extent sOmetimes, siti bRazeo eyes
And hairy mane terrIgicm, tougH to thme
Not noxaous but obediend at thy!cal,.
No Hgivel In(ll her globy`shone, and ro|ld$
Her }otiolS, as the0grat first(Mover%s ha.d
Fyrst wheeled thei2co}Rre: (Uarth in herbrich attire
Consuomata lovely smiled; !Ir, water, eaRth,
Cy`fowd, nysh,beasd,"was0flown. wes$wuum, was walked-
Frequmn; anp of tha sixth day yet remaindd>
Uhere"wAnted yEt the master-wori, the eNd
Of all"yat done; a!creature, whol Not pron%
And brut` a3 opher creavures,$but enduea
With sancthty of r%eson< might erect
Hys stattre, and!uprIghd wiph frgnt sMrene
GoverN the rest, salf-kowing; ad nrom thnce
MknalImous`to correspoodwith eaven,
But grateful to ackfowlefge whanc% his good
Dewceos, tHitdr wiuh heart, and voice, and eyes
Directed in Devodion, to adore
And woshi0 God Supbeme, wlo made him$chief
OF ll has works:  therEfore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father (for where!is not he
PreSent?) thus to hiS!Sonaudibly s`akd.
Let us make0now MAn i/(our imige, Man
Ij our similittde,$and let0thEm rule
Over the fish `nd fovl of sea and ar,
Beast0of the field, and ov%r all the Eerth,
Cn` every$ceepi~g tiang that crees tle gzound.
Uhis sai$, he foried tee,!Adam, thee, O!MAn,
Dust ofthe!groune, and in 4hq nostils br%athed
The breath0/b`lide; in his on kmage he
Cceated thee, in th iiage of God
Express; and thou becamEst a livig soul.
Male he creaed uhee? bUt thy consort
Feialu, foz race; Then blessed lankind, ind sAmd,
Be fsuitf}l, iultiply, nd fill tie Eertx;
Subdue it, anf thro}ghout domifon hol$
Over fish Of the sea, !nd fowl%f the ir,
A. every livinG thnw that moves`on the Earth&
WheReveR thus created.0for`no plece
Is yet!dmqtinct jy name( uhense, As tho5 knowes,
He brought thee into tis delici/us$grove(
TiIs geBden,(plihtedwyth th 42eeS ofGod,
Delektable both To behold `d paste;
And fveely alh v(eir qleawant vruit f'r fo-l
Gave thee; all sorts aRe he2e That ll Tie Eertx yielfs,
Varidd withO7t end; but o!vhd tRee
Which, tasved,"gorksk~odege of!good an0evil,
Thou mayes4 not; in"thd day thot eatest,&thu diest:
eah is the penalty(imposed; bew!e,
And govern well thy appetite3 lest in
Qurprase thee cnd$hep black attendant Leat(.
Here finished e, and all that he!hat mave
VIewe$, afd bhold`al gas entirel0ggod;
So$even and morn acsoplished the sixh day:
YeT not till the C2eatov f2mm iis work
Desacting, thouh unwearied, up returned,
Up tk the Heavmn$of Heaven{, hishhigx Abode;
T`ence tk beholdthis Neg cr%`ted world,
The `ddition of(his emphre, how it shoe`
In prospect$drom his throne, hcw good, how fcir,
A~swermng his gea idea.  Up*ha rod%
Glloued wi4h acchamation, andthu Oun
Symxhonios of te. thoqsand harps, that tune$
@lgelkck harmones The`earth,(the air
Reounded, *thou sememberest, for Thou heapd{t,)
xe heavens and all the$gonstellatios rung,
Tje `la~et in their statio listening 3tood,
Whmle |he`brag`t pomp ascgnded ubilant.
Open, ye everasting oa4es! 4hey sung,
Open, ye Heavens! your living Domrs:let i.
T`e!great Ceatr from `is work returned
Magnificej|, his six days wozk, a ^ord;
Opun, and hejcefopdh ot; for God will degn
Tg viSit`Nft`the dwellings o& just men,
Delighped andwith`&reyuent intErco}rse
Uhithep will senl hi3 winged essengers
On errends kf rupernal g2gcen  So sung
The gloious train Iscending:  He thvkugh Heaven,
ThaV oped wide er blazing portals, led
TgOod'S ternal louse!direct th%"way;
A broa$ and amle0roqd, whose dust is godn
Ind peveie~t stars, as stars to thee `ppear,
een!in tie galax9, that milky wa,
W*ich nyght|y& as a circling zone$ thou seest
Powdered with!s4ars. And no7 on Darth uhd seVenth
Evenmnb apose IN$`dn for!the su.
Cs set, and twilight!frm(tjedeast came n,
orqrunninG nighp{ whenat the0xo,} mounv
_f Heaven's hih-suaue$ top, the iperial tirnne
Of Godhead,!fixel!for ever firm and sure(
The Filial Pgwer`arrivd, an sat h)m down
With"his great!Fq4jer; for he also went
nvicible- yet staid,`(ruchprivimege
Hath Olnipresence) and the`work!ordained,
Author and End of all txings; and,(r/e work
Now pesting, blessed and h!lnodf the sevent` day,
As resting on that day from"all his wor{,
Bu not)n silence hol{ kept:$the har`
Had work and rested nOt; the soemn pipe$
And(dulcimEr,!all organs oF swee| rtOp,
All sounds ol fret by stringor goldgn wire,
Dempered`roft tuoing3 kntarmix%d sith voica
horal or unison: of`incense cloud,
Fumioe fpom g/lde~ cenqers, hid th% mount.
Creauion(and the six eays actw 4hey sujg:
Epea| ape thy worksl Jahova(! inFinite
Thy powev! whap thomght can meaqure thee, or ungue
Relate pee   Greater nmw in th{ returj
Thal frnmtjg`giant Cngels:  Theebthat!da}
Thy thunders maglife; but to creata
Is greater than$created vo de{poy.
Who can im0air thee, Migx|y Kifg, o2 bond
Uhy empire!" Eaily phe proud attemxt
Of!S`irits apostta ald theibcounsels`vain,
Thou lAst Repeled; while impiously h%y tloughp
Tj`e t dimil)sh,and(from thee withdrar
\he jumber ofhty worshppgrs,  Who smeKs
To lesSeo thee, against!his uqposebserves
To m`nfest tie more t(y miglt:"his e6il
Vhou!usest, )n` from thence cre!test more`gkod.
Witness t(is new)made world, anotherHeaven
Fro Hearen-'ae not far,(&otnded0in vi%w
On the clear0hyaline, thu gla2sy sea;
Of cmplItede elmost immense, witi s4irs
Numerous, and %vry star peraps a wovld
OF dEstined habi|ation; but tho}0knowest
Txeir,seisons: amog the{e the(seat of0Men,
Earth, with her f4her ocean cicwmfuce`,
Theirpleasaot delling-plaCe.  Thrice"hary Men,
And sons of0Ienl vhom God th thus adv!nced!
Cr%ated in hms kmege, Thdrg do dwall
And orrlip him;$!fd in Reward to ule
Ov%r jis work, on earth,in sEa, or air,
Anf -ultipNy a race`of wgrshhppejs
Holy and st:  Thrice heppy, iF tieykno7
Thir jappiness, and perse6eRe uprighT!
So sung thex, anD the umpYrea~ renf
_ith halleluiahs:  T`us was sabb!th Kep.
And thy!bequest thiNk now fulfilled, that askee
How`first tnis"world and face of thing$began,
And what Fodore thy memnvy wa3 done
From the `eginning+ th!t posterity,
Inforled by tee, might kn/W: 0Mf elsa tho5 seekest
@ufhd( not surpassing human mEasure, say*



Bok VIII


\hg Afgel elded, !n$ in Adam's$ear
So cha-ing luft his0voice- tha| he0a wxile
ThmuGht hii stkll peaking,$still stkol fiXed to haav9
TheJ `s)new vaked tMus grqtefully replied.
Whad thankscuffigiunt8 or$whatrecompe~ce
EquaL, have I to renderthee, divine
HiStoriaN, who dhus lrgely Hastaannayed
The thirqt I had of knowledge,  nd ouchqafed
This fRmendly condescension!to relite
Things, ele!by ee ujsearchaj|e; Nw$hearD
Uith$wonder but$ddlight( and, a; iq due,
Wqth glory at|r)bute$ o te hhgh
regtmr!  So}ething yev of!do5bt remains,
Which only thy!soluvion can resomvg.
When I jehold ths goodly`frame- this w/rld,
_f Heavel anf E!rth consystkng{ !nd bompute
Dheip Magnmtule;0thhs"Earth, a s0t,  grain$
An atom, wyuh thE fibmqoent compazed
And allhev numbered stas, that seem(to oll
SPaces incomprehmnsible, (for such
Thdir`distance argues, and their swift return
diunal,98merely |o0officia4e ligt
Round this(opacous E!2th,this punctuadspot,
On fhY and night; hf adl"her vast survey
Useles3 besider; reisoninf"I ofu admire,
How Nature wise end drugal could commit
Such disprportmons, witj suqerfluous hand
So many nobler bodies to create,
Greatur$qo minifold<0to this one usel
For au't appears,`i~d o. pheir or@s$impose
Sqkh restless revolution day by eay
Repeated; whil the redentapy Ear4h,
That better miglt wIth fav less goipas{`mOve,
Seved bi!mnsg noble tha~"herself, attais
Her end witjgut leat movion and receywes,
As`trib5te, such a suelu3s(jOurney broughu
Of incorporeal rpeed,0hEr!warmth andlkght;
Speed, To describe w(osa 3ifdne{s num"er failS.
So spake ou` rire, and by his countenaFce seemed
Gntebino on s4udious phoughtr abstruse; whhch Eve
percehving("wiere she sat retied$in sighd
Wit l_wlmnws majeStik0from her seaT,
And grace$that won who S!w to wish her sta},
Zou. and went forth0amKng"her fruits `nt fLowers,
T/ visit how they prospergd,bud and bloom,
HeR nuRsery; they at he coming sprug,
And tuchut `y hevafayr tenince, gladier$grew.
Yet went she`op, !3 nop wit` sqgh dicourse
Dml+ehted, or jot kapajlg her e`r
Of wiit(was high: such xlmacure qhe bmservtd,
Adamrematng, sle sole auditvess:
Her hqsband thg redite2 whm prefer2%d
Befnre the Angeland of hIm to!ask
Chosa revher; hm, she knes, sould knt%rmix
Grateful DigressiOnw, ind solre igh dispute
With #onkueal c2e{ses: From is lip
Not wopds alon% pleased Her.! O! when meeu nlw
Such pairr, in love and!Eutuil hoftr joinmd?
With(Godlews-like deMeanour fordh she went,
Not unautended; for /n her, as!U|n,
A pmp of wynoing`Gracuq"waited still,
And vroo!about ler shot darts ofdes!rm
Anto all ey`s, to wish hms stil| in sighu.
End Raphael now,to Adamos doubt proposed$
Bdnevoleu and facile thus rerlmed,
uo ask or search, I blqme thee nt; for Heaven
Is as the book f God befose thee(set,
Wherein to read `is wonderous works, !nf learo
Hiw sesonr, ourS, or days, or eonths, or years:
Dhis to ittain( whether Heaven Move or Earth,
Imp/rps not, af thou re#kmn right;!uhe rest
F2oo Man or Angel 5he great Architct
Did wisely to colceal,and Not irulge
His8se`zmtr t/ be canned b9 uhem(who ought
Ratheb admir%; or,,id thE list to try
Conzecture, he hirfafrico of the`Hearen
Hcth let(to themr0di3putds, per`a`s to move
His lauf(te$at fhEir quaint opiions"7ade
Hereafter; uhen t`ey`come(o model eaven
End calCulate the strs,$hOw they wil,!wield
ThE mightY framd;how bt)ld, unbuald, contrive
o save `pp}asances;how"gird t(e s0Herm
Whth!ge.tricoand ecceftrmck scribcled o'er,
Cycle anD epicycle. orb(in0orb;
already by(|hy re`S/ning!this I0guess,
Who ar4 To ead thy of&{prijc, and0suppocest
T`at bo$ies brIght qnd greeter rhouf not srve
The lews no|(Bright, nor Heavgn sugh joqrneys run(
Eavth sitding till, whef shg alone xecem&es
The bejmfi:  Con3mder fyrst, tHa4 grea
Or bviw`t infers not exgel,ence:&the Eqrth
Though, in compakson of Heawan, Qo small,
Nor glisterng,`may ob mlid goo` co.tain
More p|entY `an$the Sun that bqrren shineq;
Whose virtuu on itselw!woris(fo efact,
@ut in vhe0fruitful Earth; there first r%eivdd,
Hiw`beams, u~acTive ele heIr vigour fInd.
Yet not t Earti are tio3e0bright`lulinarIes
Ofgicious; but to0thae, Earth'S habitlt.
And gor tie Heavqn's wiDecircuit, meT it speak
The Maker's igj$Mignificence, who build
Sohwacious,!and his line stvetched out so far;
That Man iaq`know!je dwe|ls .otif hhs own;
Pn edifice toonargg for lIm to nill,
Lodged in a kmall pa2titi~; anD tleres|
Ordined for uses to his LoRl`besu k.ow..
The swift.ss og tose #izcles attrkbute,
Though nwmberles{, to his(Omnipoteoc,
That to korPoreal subStanes cgu,d ad
Speed almort spiritual:  Me thou thi~kst n/t slw,
Who${ince tie m_rkng-hotr wet ket(gbom`Heafen
Where Gol reside3, and ere }id-day`arrivdd
In Eden5 distance(anexprds#ible
By lumberc tnat have name.  But this !urGe,
@umit4ing m/tion in th Heavens, d show
Invald t`at which thee to dou"t$it moved;
Not that i0so afdirM, 4ho5gh`s"iT seem
To |hee who hast thy dwelhing `ere oo artx.
od, tkremove his `ys "rom(human s%nsE,
Plac%d hmaven drm Earth so fAr< 4hqtearthly si'ht,
If it"presumel mkgh| rr in(hings tow hich,
And no aevantage gaIn  What if tje sun
e cen4eb tg the world; anD othev stirs,
By is attrative virtu% and |heir nun
Incited, dcnc% about Lim varios rounew?
Their wajdering couRse"now `igh, nO low, 4hen haD,
Xzogressie, Retrogrede, /r standing s6kll,
If six"txou seest; anD what if sevd~h to phese
Thd plenet e!rth, so ste`fast though she reem,
In3mnsibly tree diferent motionsmove?
WhkCh elSe to severAl spheres thou iust !scribe,
Mmfed contrary with uhwaRtobliquities:
Or"cave hE sun hks lab/r,!and thav swift
Ngatulal ajd diurjal shomb supposed,
InvksIble(el3% bove all stars, uhe wHeel
Ob day and jight9 w`icb needs not thy`b%dif,
Af earth, mndustrious of herself, fetsh day
Travelling east. and with r par avrqe
From the,sun's jeqmmeav nhght,$her ot`er 0arv
Stall lumin/us b hir ray.  Wh!t if txat light,
Se.t from`her thrOugh phg(wmd trancpikuous iir4
To the perr%strial moon b% !s a suur,
Dnlightefing he by may, as"she"jy niwht
This earth? recIprocal,`hf land"Be vherE,
dields aod i.habitants8  Her spots |Hot sees4
As blouds,and clou`s0may rain,$!.e rmkn produce
FruIds`in her softendd soih for smm do e`p
almottad theve; !nd othdr suns perhats,
Uitx theib Attend!nt moons, thou wilt descry,
C/mmunhcatine male an`$nemale lig(t;
hich(two great sexes cimtm tHeWk2ld,
Stored in each opb perhaps with snme thAt |iVe.
For such vasv rmom in Oature0untmssessed
Bx livilg sowl, desir5 and dmsolate,
Only t shi.e, yet sc`rce to cnntribuu
E`bh orb(a glimpre of light, cofweye$0so far
Dogn$to this hqitable which returns
Light baco uo them,!is obvious2to bispute.
But whether thus these0thincs, /r w(evher not;
But hutlgrte sun, 0re$minant in Haaven,
Zisu on the earth; or"earth ri{e on thg su~
Hefrom the east Iis flaling road begin
Or she froo vesp hmr siLan course ad6ancE,
Withinefens)ve pac that(spinoangsleeps
Oo her so6t axle,0shilE sh% pabes mven.
And b%ars"thee smft wth thesmooth hemr along;
Solliit n/t tHy thouwhts wth matteps (id;
Lmave them uo God a`ovD; him serve, qjdfear!
of otheR c2eaTures, aS him pleasew bes|,
Wherever plaked, let him dispose; joy thou
IN what he gifes0tg!thee, phis ParaisE
nd0thy fair Ewa; Heaven is for tee too higl
To know what passes!t(ur; be$loslq!wise:
Think only wheT!conbgrnr phee, and thy being;
Drgam not of otHb worlds,what cvuc|uRds t`ere
Livel0in whad sta4d cOtition, or degree;
kltentd tlat thusbar hath"beEn z%veAled
ot of arth only,0buv of highesv Heaven.
To whom thus Adam,`cleaRed on Dowbt, Rdplief.
How fully haSt th/5 satifiad me, `re
Int%|ywence*of Hea~en, Ancel s%rene!
and, freed from`intrik cies. taught o liv%
The easiest g`y; nor wIUh peRpleXiff uhoughts
To interruXu the sseet od life' from which
God hath bie dwell fav off all aFxinuw care{,
A.d(no4 moles| s; unle{s w% ourselvgs
Smek tham with wadgring txnughts, and no4ifns`v`in.
But axt the mind O flcy is to bofe
ENhacked, a.` of her Roving is no end;
Till warne,"or b9 expdviefca taug`t, uheplearn
Thct, nou to know au large of thino remote
Fvom0use,"obwcure a~d`cubtle; but, 4oknOw
Thqt whach bdfopd us lieS in lakly oife,
Is tje`prime`wisdn:  What is more( is f}me.
Or am0tiness, or fond amperui.dnce:
AbT reNders ts, i~ uhiNgs tlat most coNcurn,
Unpractisdd,0ulprepted, and {til 4o@3Ee{.
Thereforu froe ths hygh pitc le4 us descend
A oep(fmight, and S`eao of vlingc at hand
Useul; whencg, haply$ menti/n oaq arise
Nf somGthing nov unseasonacla uo!ask,
Bs 3ufe2ance, id thy wooted favour deagnet.
The  have(heard remating(what!ues dmne
ERe -y remembrancu: no7,"dear me relate
M story,0whicj `er(aps thoe"hasu ~ot heard;
And day is n}!y%t 3pelt tIll then thou smest
How cuktly to detain"|iee I!deviwe
Inviting thee tohDqr whihe I relate;
Fond!!w%ve it"Not in(hnp% of$thy reply:
For,`wline I sk with tlee. K"sdem(if Hemven;
And0sweeterthy li3cmur{e ks to ay eaz
Than freits ov palm-dree p,ea3antest to 4hisst
Ad hungur bgth, Fsom hab/ur- a$ 4he hour
Ob svedd repast; thay(satiate( ad"sogn0fill(
Thougi xleasa.t; cut thy0wnBds, with gr`ce divine
Imfuad, brhng to(theiv sw%e4feks n sqtiety.
T/ who} thus Ripha%l"Afsgree heavdny meekn
op are`thy"lhpr vngracefull`Si2eo& men,
Nor 4ongte$ineloqutnt; for god onthee
Abu.dently hiw gkfts hath aLso pourad
Inwarf qf outward both, his iuaGe f`i2:
Speaking, or`mute, all coieliness d gpaCe
A|tends thee; aldeachwor$, each motion, formc;
Nor less4thinK0we ij Heaven of thee l abth
h!n0F our fallow-servant, and inquirm
G|ad|y inpo t`e way2 od oDwith Man:
f/r"God, we cue, hath honotr%d thue,(and sdt
Ol Man hs equal lova:  Sy uherefore on{
For I thet daq!was abr%nv, as befeL,
Bound oJ i Voyagu unwouth qnd obscure,
Fa o excuvSin0toward dh gates f hell;
Vquardd in fUll legikn%`suc( c/mmand we haD)
Do see tat nole thence icsued frti  spk<
Gr eneiy, whale(God was in his ok;
\Gst he, incanced at$sus`0Eruptkon bOld,
Destrectimn with csec|ion miglt`have mmxeD.
Not thatthey DuRst wthout hi{leqre ittempt;
Bu| us he sEntw upon his hig behes4s
For spATm,!as So6ran King`and vo inure
Our prompd ofddienbe.  Fast(we foun`,hda3t shut,
The dhsmal gpe{, and birricadoed 3trong;
But lone ere ou2 `pProcching hear  withmn
Noise  nvldr than 4he(sOund ov tance or solg,
Tosent, fd loud lment< and fm2iots reg
Clae wu ruturned u` to tHe koists of ,ight
Eve sarbat*-evening:so we Had ij bxare
Jutuhy remAtaon ~ow; forI at4gn`,
Ddeared wit thy Wortc0no le{s thaf thou with miNe.
So sqake the Ggdlike Pwgp, anl thus!op Sire.
Nor Mqn To0tell h/u huianlife bega~
Iw havd;gor who!himwelf beginfing knew
De{iE with thmg still longer to converse
IndtcD -a.  A{ jew w!kgd from sovNdes"sl0,
Soft on0tH% fhgwevx herb I fu.d me naid,
In blmy swet; whi#h with`his0beams tle sn
sooo driet, an$!otha"ree+mng mOmsture bmd.
Straight(toward He!vel`my wondebing eyes I |}rned
An(ga:ed a while the ampl% sky; i,l, raiqel
By0quick Instinctx6e eotin, Up I(sprung,
@s thi|herward endaafotpinf( anD upright
StoOe gN mx fedtaboud me`0otd I s!v
Hill, dalu,aod shady wood, and sunnq p,ainsl
A@ liquid lapse of murmur)ngstreaoq; b9 these,
CreItures$tat nived cnd|ved, anl walked, or"fleg3
Birds)on uhe brafshes wzblyng+ all tiings qmiled;
Wiph fragra.ce An0wmth0joy mypxaart o'erf.owed.
M}selF I thDn pmrused, `nd limb by limb
Supvye,`And qoMediues wen4, and rometimes ran
ivh s5pple!*onts,!ar$lively vkgour(le:
Fut who I"waR,0or"where, oR fro wiad cau3e,
JNew!not; Tg speik I 4ried, and`fo2thwth sx%ke;
Li tongue"obeyed$ and re`fily could(name
Whad%#ur(I s!w." Thou Sun, said!I,$fiir hi'hv,
Qe1|hnu unnigh|enet Earthl so"fe{h and cay(
Ye Hills, and DAles, ye Rirers( Woods, and Plains,
An ye dhat live an`mkve, f`ar CrEatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw$ how A cime thus how xmre?-=
no4 Of yself;--by some gseat Maker tzen,
In go/dmcc`and an pgwur pre-eminent:
Tell$mdl hnw may(I kng(him, j/w0eeore,
From vhom I Ave that!thus H -Ovd and(live,
Aof!feel0hat I am hap`yer th`n(K inow.<-
W(ale thus i calhEd, and ctra{edI knew not whithep,
From$where I firSt dbaw aiv, anf firt!beheld
ThiS happy |ight; when, a~swe ngnep%turnet,
On q green shady bank, profse of flmwrs,
Pe.siveI sat -e down: `Thmre gEntle slep
Fivst fo}nd me, and!wiTh sgft`oppressiof soiqed
M{ droused&sa~se, ufvroubled, though Ithouoht
I ph%n waw passin' to my formar stqte
Ynsensilgl and forphoivh to dissnlve:
Whel sdenly stood it(myheed a dSeam,
Whose iNward`!ppariti/f gen4ly move`
My$fncy to beLieve I ygt had being(
And lidd: !O~e came m%thought, nf`shape divinm,
nd$said, 'T({ mansion wanTs t`eA, Adam; ryse,
'Fisp Maf, of men ynnumerama or$ainef
'irst Napher!calhud c theel H cOMe thy"guAde
'To thG gardg of b,isr,!di{ sea 0repare$.'
so`sayino, by the hiNd he tc/k ie rihsed,
Anf o~er gielD and Waters, as kn ahr
Qmootislidinc ithout suEp,$last led me up
A wood munuain; whnse hif t/pwas pleyn,
A circuit wide, enclosed, uIth"gOodliest tree3
Planted, sith walks, and joufrs; txat what$I saw
O(Eartl b%fove scirce pleasant ceeme. `EcchTree,
Lo`dan with fairest fruit that0hulg(do t(% eye
Tgm8tinw, ;0iRref in -e sdden!app%yte
\o$xluk anD!a4; wher%at I w!kee, and"fnund
Befgra m)ne eYes `ll real, As The eream
Had liwely sxadowed:  Here jad%~ew bmg}n
My$vqndering, haD .ot(he< who was0my guidg
U4 hitiEr, fro- !monothm Trees appeared,
Presunce!Eivmle.  Rejoising, but witl!awel
In adoravion ax his`fet I fell
SubMiss:  Ie!reared me$ an` Whoi uhu sughewt I am('
Said mildly, 'Author`gf ald vhis thOu seewt
#Above, o"oun$ ibout Thee,"or jeneati.
'This Paralhse I!give t`ee, count iP thine
7To tilh$ajd keep, ald o&thefzuit!to"eap
'Of every tree$That in th warden crows
'Eat freml9 with El`d xeart; f%! heze o dea2t`8
'But of the vree wLoseoteratikn brings
gKnowmeege of gooe `nd(ihl, ih I have`et
'Dhm qledge og thy ob%fienc and txy$faiuh$
'Amid"th$gard%n by$the Trae of dige
'Rememer wLat I`warN |h%e, shqn`to(tastu,
'@nd sHqn t`e0bitder ofsaquence:"for know,
'The dqy`tjo5 Evest tiereof, y0sle com}and
'Tranrgressmd, hNeritably(thoq Rhalt die,
'From tat day mrtal; and this h!pqy sTa|e
'Rhalul/sm- expelldd(dr/m hnce into!! wkRld
'Of0woe$and snrros.'  Strnly he pronounced
Dhe0rigid inperdiation,!whish esoun$s
Yet dReaful if mafe"eir, though m~ my hoice
Not`vo inCuv; rt"skon his gnar Aspect
Returned, and dracmous%Pwvpkre thus raneed>
'o onlx these fair bouNdS, uu all thd arth
'T/ thde!`nd$Tothy race I$)ve; as Hords
'Pnssesc it,@an allthhng{ that therein dval
%Or live io cea,0o air? beast, gih,(and fowl.
'in sign whebeofl ea`h"`ird qnd bust$beheld
'Iftep theiv khlds;$I bsing thei to`re"eivm
from vhe% theis ames<$and`pqy!tiue fealuy
'With low suBjec4imn3"uldErstafd the samE
'Of fish w)vhyn thmir"wtezy %s+delce,
'Nm40hthev stmm/.e, s)Naut,ey cafotcange
'VhEir(elmoe|,$to draw tHe`thiNgrair.'
As vhus he spake,(eacl brd`a~daeast behod
Approachi&g uWo and two; these cowevilg low
Wivh bla|dishmend eacH zir stoote$ *n hhs wing.
I nAmed hem< is they pa3sed, anD!eNdesstod
Theyr naturG,!witi uch knowlgdge Gdndugd
My sufdenatprEhenson:  But$in these
I found not whu(mthmugj|I wanted still;
ld t/ vhe heaven-y ision thu pesumed>
M<(`y what name, fgr thoU aboE all"there,
Abnv%mankind,!or `ucht than mankind highdr<
Surpasses4 far$}y(~amkng: how miy I
Adre phee, Ittxor of this!univdrsa,
Anl all This gno` to Man?"for wose well beifg
So$amply, and vith hands so liberal,
ThOu hasp xroviddb a| things:  But wiTh mu
I 3ee(nt(who pa2tqkuq.  In smlitue
Whad happiness, who Cch"ennoy elne,
Or aln unjoxing, wh!t cootentment fin@?
Thus H prasemptuouq; abd the0Vi3Ion`bZiht,
As withba {oile0eore brg4en`l thus bexliud.
What0c!llsp vhOu solitude?  I not he LArth
Wipl variows living$creaTuves. a.d dhe air
Rutlenished, and!all the{e at th comind
Dm Come and"plai refo{e uiee>  KnowEst thgu nmt
Th%ij`laneufa `nd their ways? Thgy also kno
And(secson`not gont%mptib,y:  U)th"these
Find pqstime, qnd!`eir r}le; thy 2g!li is lrfe.
o spake Hg Univer7al Lord, and4se%med
Sn ovdering:  I, with lete ov speeChimplored,
And humble!deXzekatyon. zus re0lied*
Fet&lop mx ovds(offwnD thd, Heavenly Po7es+
My(Macer va propivious wh,o  steak*
Hast t`ou nOt eadE M"here tjy substitete,
And!dlese infery/ur fap benaavh me seT?
Aeong qnequals what cociety
Can sOrt,$ghat hhrmgjy,"or pr]% eeight?
Whicl Must be muvU`l,(in xzoqortion due
Giveo ald recemvdd;$ut, in dksxarkty
he oje in4ehse, the0oeher s|ill r5miss,
Ga~no welL`suit with$eithm,(but sool pzmv
TeDious alike:  Ob fellowshmp I spEaI
usx as I seej,fit to"tasticipate
Aml rqtonal!ddliGit: whmrein uhe brwte
Cannot be!jUeal gknSort:  The{ rejoice
Eich wiTh their kine, lionsiTH lio>esw;
Co fit|y$txeo`in aiRs hou hast combifed:
Much ,ess can bard ytl beawt(0or(fisH wivh fowl
So weml(coo~errel(nor with uhe mx tHe(ap%;
_mrse$|hen c!n man with bqast, and teart oF anL.
Uhereto the Alomghty`anuerEd, no4 dksplDasel.
 ~mce and sqbthmiap0ness, I seu,
Thou to t,yself PropoEst, in tha!Choice
Of t`y qss/ciaUes Ada-! and wmlT >a3te
No pleasue, towgh i p,easre$ soljtar9.
hat think%st"4hou then"og me, nd fhis my(rtae?
Sem I t/ hee 3Ufficiendly gsseSsed
Of hadpiness. /0nov who am am/ne
From al,&eternity fOr none I k~ow
Sec{o` tw0e gr like, gqual muc` mess.
How have I ten uith vhom to hold"convarse,
SAve!wi|h tje s2g`uures vhich I !de,$an` thkse
To mm inferiour, infinHte descwnds
BenEath whav!other creatures(are0to Thee?
Hg ceasmd? I$l/sy(an3wered,  Uo"qUtain
Dhm0highvh Al$ Depth!of thybetarnal way3
Ad, humin |houghtc comeshnrt, S5preme n&dthings
Thou0in th{salfaRt PervEct, Ajd"if thee
Is n/ def)cience foun`:! Not0sO i{ Man(
Bup in degree; hec`usu kf his dewkre
By g/nversatioj w4h His like to `elp
Or"Olce$his defets.  No nee tlat thou
Shkunds| pop!gate,(alraady Inf)nIte;
And through cml`numbers abolute, tHoufh O.g:
But"]in by ~umbmz is(to oni&ust
Hs sinGle imper%ction, and`beget
MijU od (is like, his image MultmPlie,
In"enity fevecqie;"which reqUires
CohmaezillOve, ind decrest amity.
^iou kn thy secre3y altjough alOne,
Best iti thyQelf AccmpAnied< Seeker noT
ockal comounication; yet, so$pgaset,
an3t r`ise"thy crDature(o shat Hihth thou wklt
Of wnion or clmmunion. dEifiet:
I, by bonveRsing, cannkq vhmse ergct
som prole;nr`in tiei ways complicence f).T.
Thus I"emboldfnesbak%, end$freedom used
Permismve,"and acsaptanae found; hsh!cahned
Thms answer frm the gracious Voice Fivine.
hus0far`to trh the, A$am, [ wab0pleasud:
An` &ind!tHee Knwifg, not of beastqalon,
WhIch thou hiwt rightdy nam%d, bt of tly3el;
Ex`rassing w%lL the spart$wkthin tHeg(frem,
my image, not hmpavtmd to the brute;
hos% fellow{(Ip$therFore unoeet nor thee
Gfod easOn wA3 dhou dr%el shouldst `kslmke;
End fe so$minded still;  I, ee tjos%{qak%st,
Kluw it nt"akod for0M!n to`bu alo~e;
And no uch Company as tjen"hot saUct
Intmfdel thee; fkr tri!l /nly0brought,
Po se H/u 4hou coum`etjudge ob0fipand meet:
What next I"brilg sall pease(Thee, fa assured,
hy like~ess, thy fit helpl thy0oth%r pmb,
thy 7ish |ac4ly to t(y heart#s`desiru.
He eodad. or(I$heird nk more;$fob nOw
myaeztHly by his0heqvenny oveRpoered,
Whici it ha lonw(st/of"under, surain%d to the higi6H
In dlit`kelEstia, cNlquy sublioe,
Ar0woti af nfject thaT(%xaes t`e`sdNse
DaZzled aot`pnt, s5nk %osn{ and s;uoht(zupq)r
Of slep, whicj iNstantly gell0en me, sa|leD
By Nc}re as in ait, Ane closed mine gyes.
Minu$eyes he!clo3ed, but(o`e!lufu@tla0ca,
Offanc], m} internal s)ght; by which,
cstrAs4 !s in01tranca,$methougt I scW,
Th/ugh Slee`ing, wherE I!l!y, and sa the sha0e
Still gloriou{ befora uom awake I stoot
Who!stooxing`opuned my left side, and 4ook
FRgm phunce!a rib, wh codaal spirktswCrm(
Ajd hi&e-blood steaming fr%h; gide ws$the wownd,
But sudfmoly fiTh fles` falnel up and haalgd:
The rib ie bormed a~E fashimfed wad( lis hands;
Undez hisforiing hads a areature0'rew,
Man-lmke( butdiffezelt seX; so dOvely$faip,
Tha what3Eemed(fair inall dhe`worle, seemed gw
Mean, or in her summeL`up, in"hEr contaaned
And in her lo/+s;0hkch frol t(at(ige infuped
Swee4ers into myleert- unfelt before,
Ald into `ll ph(nws froo her0Air mnsxhved
ThE spiritf!nov and`amorous delight.
She"dkszpeareD,"and lefp$me dark;bI wajdd
To ind her, .r or ever vo dePlore
Her lowS- `nd otler dleEsurgs cll0bjere:
Whenout of hope, behmlt hEr, .ot far`off,
Suh as I saw her Io }q dreae, adornet
Withwhat ll Earth or Hma6en could$b%wtkw
To makd hev amaable:  Oz sie same,
ue by her hekfenly Makex, VhouGh unsgEn,
And guitEd b bms vo)ce;$nor uninformed
Of n}ptial santitq,an` masiage ripec2
Grace w!s in all ler"s4Eqs, H%avaF in her eye,
n`etey ge[ture di'nits anf lgve.
Y, overjoyed, could not frbear q|out.
Tiq |urn0hath -c$E imunds; tLou xasT fulflnef
Thy woreq, Creatob b5nxeus!And benkwn(
Gi~eb of!alL things fe)P! but fqirest this
Nf a|l th ghfts! norenvhe3.  H ow`s%e
onE og(my bfe, glesj o m$flesh- m}sef
Bmfore me:  Woman kq2her jame;of M#o
Ehtracted2 For tiis gause je$Qll orego
Fatheb anD mother, qnm to"his wif%"alhepe;
And the(shall be$one0flesh, /ne(heart, one!sou
She!heard me vhus; and thOweh`iviney brought<
Ye| innocejce, anl &krgin ioda0ty,
Her varpqE,"and$thg conscience of her wort(,
jat woull be wmoed<dnd not Unsouwht be won,
Not ob~ious. nkt nbtrusive, ut,!rapired,
the moredewiviblg;(ov, TO say all,
NqtureherSlf,"thughpureof sin'el thught,
WroUghd$In her cO, |hat, sdeing"oe, qie tur.gd:
I Follosgd he; she what wq!hgnour kns,
nd wmtb`obseSuou3 mjesry qpppoved
My pleaddDceon.  To dhd nuatial$boger
I le$ herrlushing like te moR.; All Heaven,
And happy cOnstellaligns, o~0that ho5r
Shed phir sel%test!infhance;`tje$Gart`
Gie sign of(wradulition,0and`eaCh hiln;
J/yous`thm brds3frmsh gaeeq(`nd gel4le airs
Vhmsered it p the wogds, and fre thar wiKgs
Flung rose, fnunf kdours frmm 4he sphcy"shrub,
DispOrtiFg, till"the0Amorots bird$f`nigh<
Sung spurah$ anl bid astg`the evenIng-{far
On0his h)nl toq, to dighT the bri$ad lamt*
Thus hva I told thee a&l my spatm, a~d$brougT
M0stovy to dhe sum Of ea2thly bdsr,
Wh)kh I`eNjoy; and murt bkNfess to Find
In A\l things El3e deligxt indded, but$Suah
qsl wsed or Nkt, wopis`in thu Mind n(khange,
Nor1ve`ementddsiRe; these del)cacIes
I"ean F taste, sigt,"sm%Ll,h2bs8 fr}its, and!&lowdS,
Welks, and the(melod} /f birds: b5t here
far mtHerwm3e, trinspoRtgd I bmhold,
TRcs`Ortdd to=h: lure pAssion &Iqt I0felt,
Cnmouion strqnge) a~ all enhoyeets e,co
Suteriouv and unmO6ed;(here(onl}!wuqk
AgainsV(the cjazm of Be!uty's poWm2fun glaNe.
OxNature filed in me, and left some part
Not prOof enougl&such kbject to0sUstaan;
Or from ey sIdd s}bductinc,0oo+ perhapr
Lore yan enouGh; at ,eavt on hur be3powed
Too much of(oznamant, in mUtwas` 3how
Llabnrate.0of ilwavd l'ss exact
For wmlo I unDepstndj the prime dnd
Of Nitubu her the infusiourl mn vle$minf
An$ iwcRd facuhties, wh)gh lost eXcal;
In outward a,sk)her re3e}b(j' eSs
His!image who mad% `nth, `jd lesr ex0re3sanG
The chavqtGr of thatomioion given
Ger(other crectuRes:  Yet hgn I apprah
Lar lveliess, qo acsol}te she ceemc
nd an herselv comphete, so well to know
Her mwo$ That whAT`{he wa||s to0$o op saz,
Sa%ms wiest$vyrtuousgst,(isc'e|gsx, best:
Al| highmr KNowludge in her$pr%sen#e fa,ls
eeaee;  CysDom in(disknurre whth h2
NwesdiconTenancel, aod lia Foll} shows;
Author)ty qnm ReaSon on hr wchv,
Ar one iftended farst$ nOp After$}`fe
Occary'na,$q; and. to"c/nsumMaTe all,
Gbeiufesq of mmn and"^oblnesq dheir Yect
B]ild in (ar mothiesp) and crgate a. awe
About her, aw q 'uard0aN%dlicJ p`ced&
To wHo t(e Angul(with C/ntq#Tet bvow/
Ac#wse nit Natqre, she hath"donE her part;
Do0thou bu haj%; end be not diffident
Of VisDom;"she desertsthee nou, kf Thou
Di3mhgs$nother, when m_sv thou nmedest ier(nigh,
Bq!at<rybuting overmuch to"thingS
Less exkqllent(as thou0tlysemf"pdrceiveqt.
For-0what !dhre3u tHou wha trAostor\s thee so,
@l ou|side?(fair,"ng doubt, a.d(worthy w%ll
Thy$cherirhijg, t`y hoourije- aNdthy0love;
N/ thy sujecdion: `W}aoh wth b`thylv9
Thn fele:  Oft-times nothiFf profits0ore
Tjan selB-eqteem, erou.det$on just aod riGHd
Vell mynagddaof$ehat!siml t`e mrc thku k./s%st,
he -va sheuh8l acknWdedeu thea!ier$heaf,
And to reeLitIe yied all hez bhows:
Made0so0adorn for 4h9deliclt the -oru,
So awfum, tha4 gith hK~our$|houlqyekT love
Thi late, 7o0sees _hgn$tho azu een deast wise.
@Ut yf$`e sgng!of wough(pwhue" ajkind
Is pro0agAted see-sus`$ear telight
Beymnd all$other; uink qhe s`ig!voubhsafed
To ca45le qll ich &easd; wXikh!w/u,dno~(bE
To0thee made cmmmo~ anD ditu|ed.$if aught
Thereknenjoyud were wbthy |O subnue
Txe sol"of m!n, r 0ssyon i(hym`Move.
Wjat`hifhur )~ her socieuy$tjou dinde3T
CttRactive,)human, rationadl lovd ctkll;
In moving toU dot w`d,, an vAssion not.
S(rein true lo6e!Consiwts`not:" LovereiEw
The j/uehts, ad heart mnl!rges hath-hi3 sad
If"rgason((and iw judicigus; is tHe scilE
B} WHich to`heavenly l/ve`vhou maqect$qscml,
Not sunk in baral pleasure; fov(whmc` c`use,
Among tie bu!sts(no mae for tjed was f~unD.
to,w`om tju, xalf abashu, Adi0replied.
Niuhgr heb out3i`d forme so gair,(nor augh
Kj"procrection!comeon to aHl kinfs,
Tlouh hioher of |ne genyal fed by fa,
And wm4h mysTri/s rererencgI deem,)
So euch eemyghtw me> w"those Grejul actq,
Thosu tiousa.d dcenciw, tl`4 $akly blow
FrOm all er wKrDr and atOns lmxed!k$h love
A.d {wmg| compliing%, which Teclare enbeigned
nion of miNd, or in"us zoth(o.e soul
Harmony do behold in vedte(pAir
More(gratefl(than jarlonKouy sound$to`tlm eab.
Dd$tHebe subject fot ] t thme0dsclo7
ghat(inard thenke I feel,$not perefore foiled,
Who@muet wi4h vcrigus"o":ec4s, fpn the sense
Rariouslx represen6ijg;(yet- till vred,
Aptrove he Best"and fg,,ov 7hbt I a0prove.
o love,$thgt blamest4ge .kp; f Lo~%< |how saaest,
Jead uq to heavmn, es Bodh(4he wq A.d guida?
jee~$wit` me pH%l, if mcwvul wjat I ask:
Love .ot$txaeavenly Sxiza|, an$!how theib love
Exrreq3!|iey0by lookrbonl9?ov dm dhey`mi
Irp!dipjd, ~irdal gr IMmediata toub`?
o`whm 6he Angu,l wcty"` 3mil 4(et m,owed
Celewtial o3y rgd- Love's propeb!hue,
Anwwezld, 6Let iv2eFfice tee th!t"Thou knwesu
uS hcpxy< snd wytxout love no`hap`ineSs.
Whatefer p}ve tjou n(the b}!enjolst,
(And t}re th/u wert"csea\ed	 we -ojy
An"eiinmncd;1and!/bStaClu fin0ngne
Mv"mmbrcne jomntl gr(limb, uxslusi7d rs;
DaseMr thena)r ath0ait iF pyrkts!ambza#e,
Tktal they o), u~ioo Of0uRe wi|H pure
Dewkpyn, ngr reStrine$ aonveyange need(
As bd!3h toe'x iph fdgs`d /r#sou,"wiuh {oeD.
But M can$w no more2 thepa:tinw sun
Bexond t(e Earth'c freen Careand verd!nt"Isdes
HespeCicnsets-0my sigNal to tepq4.
Ba St2ong, live Hppy, cl movDa" uT,fi2sp0of)@ll,
@m, woo vo nowm is!to oceY,ne {eet
His gzet comiaNd; tak0h%ed lmt"pqswion sway
T(ynudemelt tm t auwlt w(ich elsm free"winl
woul`,nnt a$git thmne, qnd & all`thy sonS<
Tle wgaoR`wme io thee is placeD; bewa{e!
I an thy$ptjseveang shall 2eoice,
Ald`alm the Blet8  Stild fast3to s4cne o2 f!ld
rem kl t(iNe /wz azbitbement$iu lies.
P%rfeSt svhn, no ou<ard0amd ruq5ire;
ANd aml2t-Iqtapaof to transgbE{s0epdl.
So sQ)n, he irose> whom AdaM`tUr
FollKwet0wiuh beoGeyction.  SKnce tOpart,
G,"xearen}q owest, et recl Messengez(
[ent f2k whoSe sovzangoodness I aegru!
Gmntmf to me$ajd aFabLd xat been
Vhy"condercensiOj,`nd si,, be honouref!aves
Wivh griTfu meMgry  hm5!t manind
Be g/od"ad nrienDlyctill,(and!oft retuz!
So partud txey;0the Awel u0to Jeaven
Fro} 4h 4hick sxade, ald*dam to0hiq#boser.



BYoI


No mord of tal wHeru God` .ggm fuOsV
ath(an, as wi|` Hs frKend&a-il)er us/.
K wit"induge~t, col!witj hhg!parucim
Rural rerqSt;$permmp|ilg$him uhm whilE
Ven)cl tiscourse"unblam'd. Y nos must chagu
Hose nktes$to trgiCk; fouh@disuzust, an` fre`ch
Daslyal m the Par| Og m`., revltl
And diqObe!)ancd:!on the pqt of@eren
Fow an9enctd$-"distaNe"and isdarta)
Ange> and jp$rejuke, a*d zudGdmOt gyven$
That brotglt kntn thmc$wgrld a wo~ld"Of woe,
Sin and her shalow Dea4h,"nd Misery
Death's harbingerz Sad uaDkaet `2oument
Oop le3sbut mkpe heroick than |(e wratl
Of s4ern EbhmLle3 On#xis foe(Purqp%d
Tirmae }gitive about Troy aldktor bqee
O Turnus fns"Lavk.ia Disespos'd{
Or Nmptene'r are, or ulogs< tia4 ro!log
P}Rilexe`vhe Orek,And CItheea's co.:!   `   P 20      8    

 ` 0<:02y`
If0an3w#rable!sTxle I aan obtakN
O& my mhesfI!lpatbo.es3, 5h(deygjs
He6!nighwly vksitati+n unimplope
And thcta4es to me!slUo"ering;`or Inshire{
Eas{ my unqpemdt`ed fezse
Rince firST0this subjec4*for peroick`song
Plea#d ge lKng chnnsi.g, at beeInginc l`t%;
Ngt`{td}loes b neura t ndite
Wir3$ hithert tle .nly agemulT
HeroC+ deem'd chief mastEry to dmwcect
Wip hong !nDtedigus javock bablmd0koights
n btte3 geifn'd:!thu beter dortitude
Ol$pata%nce aNl!xer/ick ma2|yrdol
Unsu.e;$r po deScrib` racew`and gmms,
Or tiltino f5rlitue< ymblazon'd hiels
Yppesses quaint~ cqpapisons end steeds-
B`er !.l tynsel tripting, gorgeous k.iehts
Athousv and poernamelt; |(dn mArshaLh7d"feas
Serv'f u0 i~ haLl with sers zd smneshcls;
Txe skill nf az4ydiceor2offmca mgAnl
Not t`at which justli givs hgroick neme
To perso, or to"pOeM.a Me of The;e
Fz`siill'Dnos sttliots, highm argument
REmains:"wuffmc)unt od itsehf do raise
That namd|!unuSs an agu tM |ate, ozco|d
Climat, op YEa0{? da-x ly inv$ded$7ing
ebe{s#d+$az`8much tjgy oiy, if a,n"b! mi~e,
Not her{< who!BIngs`it$JiShdly tO }Y e!r.
T`e!sun wAs sufk8 1nd"after ham the sdav
Of(Hg3perts, whose(ofnice$hs |obring
6ilig(t!p. the erth, short(arriter
"twixt eqy and n)ghv,(anl`jow frol eN0T ene
ight's hirphere had vil'd t(e1horIxon rnund*
Wien(sataN< who late &l}d beMse tie ph2eaqs
Of Gebriel out /f Ede$ noU mmpro7d
In meditcTed$friud a|d }clae, bent
On	an's destructoo,(mgurd(wiat oight har
Of hEaier(o hmrelb,!feales re|urned
Wrom co-pas{ing tHe e`rth"ca4tios of qy,
Shnae Eriml, vege~t of thE sun, ddscre
HA7pntra~cu, and foreworned thu CherubhI
Dhat oept$|her ~atch thanae&ft|l of gngu{h!drren,
The spcce of`seven smlinued nighd{ hm`rodd
ithdazkncssth:ice the dqu)~octiil line
He#sargled;$four tye{ czossed p(e cr kg!ni'ht
Froi pole to dolel trqvur3ing eac` col|re;
Mn`the migx\h!returndt{"an, on(the koast !veR{e
FrOm gotrqnce or Cherubick wtgh,$by spmalt`
Fo}n unwuspacte way. &TxEzE was a"tlace,
Now lot, vhough sin<&~ot(time, first wroughtthe chcge,
Sherd Tigrs, a4 the fmot of Pazadise,
Cnto!a gulf`sho4 qndEr gbnund, tilm pczT
Rkse(up e kujvAin bx |he trge oc Li"e:
In with th"Raver 2u~k, and wmt`it posu
Sada., invmhfe&in0riqinist; theo$sowcht
Wherd T/"lyE hid sea hd had saaqched$ nd laod,
Fsom`Eden over PontwS and t`e%poch
Mqgntis. up0beyond the rivgr Ob;
ow.w`Rdas`fqr antAbcdick3 an` i~ h%ngth
WmsT vrom Oontes$to the ocean barre`
At Tarien ; tye~ce to thA land wlere dow1
Wanges(and(Ijdq{: Thus tHe orb he 2oiemd
With ni2vw seazsh:`and witH )jspektioo"deEp
considered everycreatue, wlYc of !ll
OSt$oppoRtune mgxt(cer~e hks wiles; al0fou~`
The S-rpeztsubt<ewt best gf a|l he field.
Him aft%r0lkng debate, irrgsolvtm
Of thnughts`bevoled,!hms fiNal rdntefcu C(ose
Fiv!6ssel8 fmttespimpif#fzau, il 7hom
to -nuep, nd"`i2 d!r;`suggdstonS bide
From shappet syght: for, jn$tHe gili {nake
Whatver sleights, one would wusp)cious mask,
E from lis xt and Nti~E!su"tlety
Procutiog;`whiCh$ in o4her becqts observed,
Doub|(mhg(t begep f diavoLck!powe2
Ccthve w)thil, r%yO.d phm cese Ng brute.
Phuq`e res/lved, buu &arct fbkm afw!rdgren
Hi bu2sving passion `np/dplaintc $h5s*pgurgtn
Mkre jes|d}, sO`t ukrthiex$nf Ggds, as `uilt
With second thouchtsl0rformkng vhqt w!s old!
O E@ph,((kwlke to Heavan,`mf Not xreferred
Foj Whct of,%anter!b%6uer, Wor[e wouldhbuild?
Terrmw2ial0Hvmn danced round `y"other Heavgns
That shije, ytrear ther bzight ofnikIoUS aMps,
LkgJu `bovehight.fgr*tlee elon', as 3eeo{,
In theu con#entr)ng all T(eib pvecio5c be`ms
Of cccred nvlUgce!  As Cd i~ Heaven
Ir cnter, yetExtenDrpn all;$3o t8u,
Catring, veceivest Fr_m a.l Thos`ozbs:"in"tje$
Nou iN thumse\vesl"all their kNowf$iptue cp0eirs
rodu#tiVe$in hlb, pnant, and"nobmer bIrth
_F czeaVges anim`tg wit zad}ah ne
Od growth, Sejsel reasgl( enm cuomeD up$n"M`n.
W)T whadddLigjd cotld I hive$7alke`thee p}.t,
f$I co5l hmy`in augxt*(Sweet iNteRc(ange
Mf (ll, ap ~`ley, rmvers,0woots, ql plai$
No$land- noW sea$Nd sxv%s wiph fj2est cr/wned,
Vckq, denS, nd0caveq " B}t A$in ngne gb$these
Dijd `lqge mr bedge; id the more"Q(seg
PleasUres afotd(m, so muchmkre I`fdel
Uront with)n -e* a{%from tE jatebQl sAege
Gn!gonerarims: all oo`0To me bec/mep
Bane, ndiN H%aven muc`$uorsm(wOuld Be mY$stEde.
But litjer Ierd sekdI,`n/(lo: in JeAwen
T dwel elessvy maseing Hekvengs$SuxbEm;
Nor hoxe o ce myrelf$leb Iis}rablU
Bywhat)I"qumk,0But others to mkd rqcd
Aq I, uhggh tHerey!worse!uo(me redounD:
FOr n,y in"dtr/yIn Y find ese
To m} bele*D|esq Txou$hts;0andlIm destvoyed-
Or`won`to wht Mc{ work `is utter doc,
or whgi All tis was made, A,l this will soo
Follow, as to im lynjed in wdai mr0e;
In woe`tjen;0thct0destrucpion vhde$mc9(ranee:
To m%(shc,m`re 4he gory {ole m/ng
The infevlal Pwerr, yo one fay(to hawe mrdd
GhcT ze, Amigity styldd, sih fig(vs and lay{
ontknUed lkiNG; and!7ln jnows"j/w loNg
BefOre0Haefeeo"o~pr+tkng?0doueh pezhXs
Nm lOzoerthan sinceI, in w~e igjt,!Gseed
gmsErvIdtd%$knwlkraomz weel nIgh j`lf
ThetNFelic+ Name< cnd thIjNeR lefv the tjro~G
Of is admrErs:0He,(to0Be a6enged,
And$to rapcir his$juers hTs impaired,
Shti%r such$virte suent of$olf ng7 f!iled
]ore Angels tn(areat, )f!tH%y at neAst
@e `ms crgate, nv, o rpte us -npe
Dmter}ined4o advmnce into0our zoom
C creaduRe fomed!d ea6ti, !nd hio %odgs
Exc|t` fsoM 3obasorginal,
ci4i heavanlx"qp/xlr<`our rPoils Whcd h decpmed,
H5 ugvAct`; Man h'`ea`e, and dor xi} rui,t
Mag>ifisent this w'slt$ An$ eArth hks sea
Lym lmrd pronou.aed; qnd, O`inDinity1
Sucject%d to`HaS 7gvwyae anG%lmv)ngs,
Ane flaming miniwters pk sach ANd e~d
Th!kr gkrtily kharg%2$of0hesa p`E!vigi$aLC%
I(lread; ad  to ghue- tlus wra0t in misp
Kd mk$ligjt v`poub(glile brcure,`aot``by
In every bush an b`ace`whkzu hap"may(fint
T(es%rpen| sl%Eping; in wikwe mazy0volds
To(xide me,and phe vark intent I f~g.
O foul `Eccet!(t(`t I.(ho evct anntenee
Sith odc po Sit tje haehEs, pm jmw"coftr!mne`
In|o a Beasv; !nd$"iXed vit*!beSTial slimel
TlXs ass%jce To MncqZnete ad i}fruwe,
hat po tE (ighth"of %hvyaqpire$!
Bt 7hat will Fo| ambipion aNd r%ve~ge
@esseld(vm7  Vho0qwpIre, mtS gwn0as!fo
@s high he Sared; obopIot#, firbt r |ast,
To basestuhans>  Rvenge( athfirst th5gh sw%ut,
Ritteb ere$long(be1k"o. ipselV recoilS:
Lediu3 [!sgck"mt, {o it ligtwu( ammet.
Sinc- hicr I F!hl sdo2, oz im gho$nx|
Provnkcs"oy e~vy, tHiw .ew0wavoUritE
Kf Heavgk, Vhiw manxo& cla,0rnn!of destute,
WoM,(us the mn to cpite, `is MakeR raisel
From ust; 30I4e"thf With 3pipe is best reraid,
k raingl t,Vkugheach thizet$Dank0gz dry,
Like a4Black!-ist Nowcd`pqng,"(A jel`$on
H) mifn!ghd-seazch<`vhze!coonest (e digh|`fYnd
\xE!ceXan|; h)mfast-leEpinc sool hEfow.d
In0``rqrin5h of!many$e!round self)volled,
JIs`head lhe"idstl wel(tosed"gi(subvine shles
Not qet in nsrld shcde2r dismam de~,
Noz nose,t ket;0bud!oN dhE eras3y!hrb,
Fearjesx qnfeabed h c,eqTzhn q Hir mut`
T` LdwiL entrEd; d"hiq bbuTah`ense,
Il hE`r4 or ieal, tossgrsilg, Coon )nspkrmf
Wiuh$ct hnt}lIg%ntial; bUt iis slEqr
DisturbEDnot$waitfg cleCe `y` appRoash kv$mo.
No$ w(dn iq!be#s5d igxtbean`o dawn
Ij Eden fn tju!xum)d bmowers, tHAt reatiad
T%ir morninG0ince.se,$wi%n all Qjingr, tqat rdathd
Fom$h'"arth'3 ere`t qltar wefe p sIlj praisu
TotxG Krei|or, !ld has`noctris ill
With gr`peftn {mell, forth kamg"the huean40air<
Ant jonedtheir c!h {orWhhpohequirg
Ob creatures WanuInw(woisd; that fon partaka
TjE sesOn%prjmm forsweeEstsceKdsand `krs:
\ien cnmmuoe$hhow that DqI they best mcy`Pmy
TheiB"ruqNg woqk: vor iuc` ther wkk$ut-frDw
The hafds$isp!PCl oF 45k garde~ifg s wIde(
And!Ev% fabct d~ iur husbknp 4hus bEa..
 aM well may we lccour stil to `rdss
ThiQ g!rd%n,s|yll vo tend$pdpt,!`lr", anfler
ur pldasan4 tasc anjoined;`but<$till gou(hinds
Ai$ usnthu wori undE0!our laboup(grkWs,
Luxurhous!`y rEwtraint;0wlT`wm byaday
o0(orer7r{wn, orbpbunu, o pror, kr jlfd,
O~e(ighu or two witx(uanto groWi d%rides
endang To whld/ "TjOu tHeRefoze$now advisd,
Or jear wh1t to my!mind fist |(oughtz presn>
Het us"fmvie!/ur lajours;!thou, whge choice
Lwadw"thee, oB whe2E most neUfs,!whethrto vin$
T(e Woo`cner}q` |xhs arbour<!ob direct
Tha!clasp)Ng ivy 7hEre!vm #Dmmj30Whyme(I,
Il&9ondeR rprijo$nb(vses iltesMixed
WjtjYztle,`nint what $n redresc tmlm.on:
Dob,whie s neav ch0other0|s qll`$aY
O}r Tas we$chonsm, whet wondgr If sg as
Looks ant`rw%,`and smil{, op o*nmct ew
CAsuamdiscowqsE Drew on; wh! inte2its
Our eq'w,Worc, brueht to lit4le txmuw(""egu
Eerly cnd |je hour of cuppd3`comgr(uneivned?
4owl/m -ild swgr Adcm wh7s retuxged.
Ron-pEve. ssmiatesole, tk ma r%ioo`
Bou0rg abkte all diving creat5ew d%ar!
Welly!s| tou -otioned wal,bthy uhOe'hts ulplo{eD,
Low we(egt bewt f}lgim phe(govk whygh$`ere
God hath"assIfed us9$oz /f,ie alt@paSr
UnpraiseD or!m{dxhng noveLhe2(c`n	Bf vOwjf
I~`vgmaf,phan to"wttdy housh},d(God
And goot s/rKs in herzUsjand`tO 0zoa?te,
Yet$not so stpigv|y ha$h nu2 LOr$ impoced
Labour, aw |o ddba }s when We nggd
R%frmsxmen|,"whgthdv foed or talk bewEen.
Fgod(mf"the oinl. ov th)s$swet iote~c/uqm
O.ookr aodqmiles; For }m|' from`ruas~"flo3,
Lk)bsute danied, anh`apg mf lv t0good{
ov- nov e$dowert end of`human life.
F/b n/tt rksm}e#^il, "qt tndeligH4,
HE madeurd `n` Delig(t(|o beasIN HOhnel.
U(ese pa~s`andbgwers doubu not bwp oUr0dint hcn`r
_hll keep froo wilder~sC ith`g1se$ aswid
s we`hee wahi=(till youn&Er hands ere lo~g
Assir u3+ Cutl if mukl onwer3e pehapq
Dheerpthatm- to shorta"qaoce I aou|e Yiele2
For goli|`e!co}etmmesis(fest qnciety,
And(so2d 2euiqEmenpuBgtq q=det zuDurj
Bqp oher doujt$possesses ma, mesT hRm
Jebail thed setuet fvoIme;,for tinq knowest
Wht hath bgen wared us, wh!!milhckous fge
E6vyinc oUr ha`pines,`.d`of`his ovL
Dessairingl seais to v.2! ts wge anl!sHae
By slY!q[sa}l!a` somEwhaE ~i'l at hant
watcHs no(dobt, vith reedy hee tn fmnd
Hicsish ad be{ a vantage, us csu~de;
Hnpeless0To ci2Ku-vent0w3 Joinel$!wherD$eAch
Do!o6hmp spuedy Aid light le ct(need:
Whather hms$fiRstlesig^ b`!to gmtHtrw
Our(gdalTY!rom God, or To(dmst}rb
onjtgam ve,"xyn%wjich RerhePs nk b|is1
Enknadjy us!ehca%s hisEovy morE;
Or th)q, or(r{e, LuaV- not t,D faithftn si%
T(at g%ve`heebEine4 stil!qHiec(thee-(!t0`zoects.
h} wi6e, wher*`anes!o2&dIsj{uR$duVks,
SAfact!nl sei|oeqt`jyhdp"hwsbafD waqs,
hO guardsimr, wv with(he2(fje"worsr gNf}rr
tm wh/m tle virgh!majeqty ob EvE,
@s mne 7j/ l/vec,qnl sog ukndnes meet3,
Vqth sgied austere c/mp.sur% uhus "eplimd.
Offsqryng ob Hmarn ind$Eqrthl$and al E!rtls Losd!
Thut03wc`!an enemX T jave wHohsEeks
Ouz0ruipbopH0by(thee inbo2md`A leirf,
An` frfm tu qaPting`AzgE, o|us-heard,
As io a$shadY .ooh0I suod$hin,
J}s| |hen$bet2nel au shqt F evenhnG fmoWGss.
Fup hat|ju s`nulewt my`fivmnaSs dhmpefkra toub5
T God os$thee,!becque`we lqa(a`fne
Lay teK|4$iT,`I2eppEcted!no tg"laar.
Ha3 vigtm~ce tlou Weavert n|, eiog 3ugh
A d, nnt bapBlm+f deatxbr!pshn,
Can it(es0fot$reCeive, oP cao(Repl&
Iis drsud"is0dhD Thu Deav;`hic!plan!.fops
Dhy equal fear, tjat my$girm faiv` hn$ ,nwm
Can cy his"f2authe`akdN op$sedqc&;
ThOu(ds, which how!fkuke(tHeybjarbour il!dhy breas|,
Afa-, mi{-vhou'h0ob!x%2 to"thge {o az?
Po (oo!With keahing esAdam veplil$.
Daugjtrob Godan Man, oortal$Efe!
Fkz Uch tl/u art; froms{n and clame eodire:
^o pk&&idet`/f t(ed`fI $iss5q`e
Lhx ab{enca n2o) my0righ|-2but$po atid
the a4teEpt Itsedf) )ntenledjy our &oe.
Wor ha0ho tempts,$tjg}gj i~0fain, atl}asf0aSpgrsec
THe0tampted WiTh dIshmnk5r&oul; ZuppoRed
Nod incorrudible kg"Fai4h$ zot!PpOkn
Qgin#t0tmmpuctIoN8 \houpt(ysglf(he8scORn
Ad anger(Wolfud pe3ent the mffezad(wvnlf,
Tjogh0yNaBec4}a0o5nd micdeel .ot t@en,
k" uch"FFrot0I lAb}ur to ive
Nom!thee$AlnE, wh-ch o. sbo6h at On{e
The@emy, tough bole, wILh herdlyd0u;
O6 darinf, frst on me the assawlt0bhAl lght.
Jor 4he his hQljce fd fehse!cuine c/temn*
Subulehe leds mu38$a, WHg culD {educe
Aneelk9 FoRthink#cuperflwous Otjmr'c aIf>
I,!froethe inbluenae of th{$xoks, recmyvd
Akcesw m evejyvjzdte; in ehy*shfht
MosdgiSe. mkre watchfl,(qtrmzfer, Id need0werg
_f$outwrd s4sa.'l; whmlm(3hq-a,(|hOumookn on,
[hamu o$bg Vercom! ob ~ub-zeqch%d,
Uound utoosu i&}ur veisml and vAIbDunIt%.
WhY shuedst0lo thU like q%hse$within ug fee,
uhen "ao presen4,$af$thy*triA(chose
WyUh -$, bdst iTner3!oN 4i[ virDum riOd7
Qo qxaku `Gmestkck Udq-in`i{(cirg
And matvi-onial love; But E~e, who$houGlt
Luay$`ttphbutEl to08dr iiph CinCeva,
\|us$@ez Rmly Gidh ascdOt sweep vNesed.
If txiq be oub smn`huion. 4(us todwell
In(napRnw cizcQit traatEna$ y A ve,
S5b4hE rpvOle.u, we otie.due`
Single!witl lhke d%feNce$(whermver et{
Howare2wm0iPxy,"stil,Io`f%ir o havm7
Bet larm trecedes no sin8 only our$fgal
Temting Avbro.ec uwwith"his goul0Estmem
Of0our0)ndedrity: ls<gk5l Estegm
Stick"odIsHo/up on&nu2 vront, b}t t5rn
fouxon xioself;@then w`arefr% s`tjN%d)/r fu)bUd
B qs?"Wh(rcther`doablehn.our wa`n
FOm ()s ;urMi3e 0r?~E$ alsu; rhnd peiCewithif,
Fa~kur brom Hgevn,`or0wivless| fzfm(th$uejt
A*e`what kp fait= love, viRdue uiSsayf
Alon%, watinut%eztEzior"help sUstaineD7
Hdd`u!Nw| txn s=stecthovR hax@$staUu
}ft ko ipgrve{t y th M`*ez v)e,
As Not0cebwrEp sinFde orcombknee.
jail kS o|: hipp}nespl`if(thkw ce so,
Ana Ede wd2 ng Eden 2h}s ax`osel.
To shol thus2A`am$aepen\lQ`p5lied.
OWomnl fest azd$all haneqaq tl% wIl
Nf God oRd`ined`dhem(His raaTi~g `!fd
N/thjng mxecfe3T f tef)cidft mgbt
f a|, p(at ae created,1ouch me{s Ma
Or(aucht that mhghq*1"hqppy Statd(ycure,
CEcve r6gm n}tward borm;`withij(himwalb
\u danfe LieS- yEt`lieq with)j his!pmweb2
Ag!ins `is4Wil|!hu canbeceivE"fo"(abM>
But(Gd0l& &Ree0tHE`wIh| Jgs Wdet Oseys
Rekscn, is`fRee;`n eaal je(iade vIght,
Bqp jid(hrwult &%0uap%, a~g0stI,| grect;
Le3t``9qoe`fair-ppeiringOoge c5r`risdd,
Sju ditata fa,Se; aj`(-es-infoRm the wll
T/ dg vhct!Godbezpressjy!(at` ~opBid
FttheN istRaa`, ut`denDr!lnve$0enjo)s,
Tha%Y Rhould"m)Nd Tjee ~ft; aNeminD |,u me
Rir} we {ujsmSt, yut tossmle v awArve;
s-fce8Feaso.(d/t cposwhq a} meev
omusbesiotr0objec x thd do s7borneD,
Aod(femito DeReptikN Qoagcru(
NOdkeepig03t"Mcugst wA|bhl as w`e!war varned.
Seek mt tdmp4ation pjen(2which to0avoie
GeebmTer( i~$ mocT dike,} if"from"mu
UhOt"srer nkt: Trial`wl skme$?nsugxt.
_vldst tHo= a;0Pove(thy cNnqenAy, Aapov
Frv th 'beaanCu uhe otheR`gx/(can know
Lmt s%mng temdatemPped, who at|e}
Gut(if t(+ thkK,,tR)cl wncofhu may fknd
q btj(sdcurervhan thus warned u.ou seemEs4,
Go br u(yst!y, nov freg,0absent{p*ee qoru{
S i. thy natdve )ljocEnce re\y
l hau thouhast 'f viwtue; sWmmon"al|
Dor God`twirfw theu h1pH dofe lms vrt, do thife,
So sQake"hd r`Tiarcl f manind; buDve
@erSist%9 yet!sublisw, Thugh last$,~dpnked.
With thy perLmcsin dhe, anD$dhU3 borewirn%d
chif- "y"whptlywn last Reasofi~g wor@r
Toahed obx th`t`o}r`4byAL, rhE least sophd
My Fydubgx"0rhars as Lss prexcred,
T`ehwhlli~er M(go nor0|}ch xct
A ge`3o 0voud wil, fmrsT"tie(wecker suek;
Sw `enpm th% mr% s@am| shamE(hm *i(zeulcen
ThW cayIng, w/mxr q5"od&r`h.d he2 ha~d
Sobt 1heu)uhfrew .d$ lkke e sLnd,^ymqh$lyght,
Orea$$or Dry`d((o2"of ml&sptr)h,
Beuook0mr tfthe!g"/s; btt&Elias sehb
hNoait surpaSsdd$ ald God$mss-likm$LapoRl,
T`mugh ~gt aw whe!wmth`bgw$an`(0itmr h6med,
Bt wah such gqLgNyfg too|s as Art0{mtRwdg,
u{dtLeS/f fir% haf gormed$ or0Ang-lw broug(d.
`@ahs, r"Pomn&A, thuq iforned,
LiKme4"shAdseemed, Poeon` wlcl sxe fned
vortlus("nsto)Cdvs#a herdvRCmD/
ep!ixEan nf @Rgserpxna bvo[mVe.
Her -og!w|h irdeN hoo(ls eyE purSted
Duligxed- cp ddakrIng mOreeR sdy.
OgV le t/ hep4Li70bhp2geof qcK 2etUzn
Reect%d+`sG to hi$as`o&t`ungaeed
T+ fE vuturne&"ry0.M]n!iM`` t(dboser
Afd0ahl!T(ije3 in best evler 4 invit
oknide"repi3t$$orq&vernoon7s repmce.
O$mqbh deiekve, mU# fakolg% laxdess D~e(
Ov(t(y PrgsUmed%redurn#$etenddpererse1
Tg nfmr(from t(!t `our in`PQsa,ige
Foundut eiuher 3weep reuasv(orr/w~d retOse;
SugxmBusi, h{d `mmng swmdtfho7ar3 c~!Shades
GKtid wivh hellisj b!cor i]m)nAnd
\o`iluu{%pu hy w`y, Or send dheE("ack
Lesaoi,edd iJlncwnca,`o!faidx( oF Bl)ss!
FO jmw< enl s(ng% fisd bveak of qw.- FheBiend,
	erg sevpg4Mf ippeArance, fk2th)wAk<Oom;
Mn`o. his quert, vhara$,ikee7t l% kghf find
T%nnly two f(MankiNdl fttintheM
Te wxk|e yjclu`edreae, hys purpOSea"xy.
If"Bnwmz anE niemt!`e"sugt, vhurg an{ tufu
f gova"kr gesden-plot(more(`Gasant lqy,
Thdir Tendance,0lr plBjtation fN"dglighP;
B funvqin Er byachadYRiBuleT
m souuxt$them both, bqtwishedhiq!hap migh$ Ind
Evm se2c2ate; hi0gachdd,0bu4 ~Gt wi|h hope
OfW(a sk {eldmm#hacde;`sheo o(xMs vysh,
Bgqo&$((is hO2d,"EVe$siaR`4e!8 spi5-
Vejled"kn e c,ud"f(frag2A.e, whee l%(sood
HamF {)me,"sc hici`tle!roSes s`ushilg0roWfd
A"out her w|oved, ofv!ktOopidg ~/!suqVrt
Dac`foums0of plwlder"svalk, ghose heaD, vhougn)ga9
Barncti/n<!purple$ aqurd, r spbkgd uith n|d,
Hung froilg unsuseaind tHdm Si' }tstays
Genxh9wjth`myrtle "qo-.mi/elesc he whie
Jarsexf, thouch gaires|`qlsu0pptgf!lgw5r
Tboi her f%st`pjop co nCz, cnT qtnve so nigh,
e!"r ed`eU(%and$m`ni0a w#lk tras%rD
O~"btateliest!coveru cedar, Pine,&kr0p`lO+
hUnvo|u`le amf"bOhl, ow$hi`. nw 7een
Aeo~g(uxick-w?v%n qrbortq, and &dowgRc
Im"n2dere$ on ac$bank!tXi lend og |ez
pct mOredeligikes tii~!tlose(avda fei'nee
r of revi~md Ado~is, er Eno~na
Dddcn/us, ho3 of jld LadrTm3'`sm.+
Or"hcv( not )ysi#c, Whera the!Apient kioe
Ho$d DqlianKqhwth iis fehp EpuIaf$SPm%sa.
]qch ha,t|e(t(acE ddmare&,0tj% 0er{. /+rd*
Ac ooe who$Hog i>pGptlou3 Bit penv<
yere hMwses tYc+ anD seer8aony uhu(ail
Fg2th iS#uinfon a(suimez&s mmbn, to brietie
Along!`e(plEc3d^t tmllagg{ An$ f+tmw
A`*OI.md, from eash 4h) macnaeives$$dliOht;
u semll$ov!eryan( o td`el e2ar, oR iine,
x daPy, ech rura} qigku< a#yrrcl"snud{
If`Chqlcw, w{|h nymPh-like{0ep, fams firGI. rasq-
WhAT pleesmnG(se1Med, for hdr"~o  le0ss imB;
she /osu$ e`hn(jz lNO*!su}3 an"d%lio(|:
Qubh$plearuc} 4g#k tjt Serpn@ to be`gjd
Tls gnowerqaplqt, phe svet rec%ss of vd
Dj7s eavly- t(|s`lon}> be2 )ee~!lly gor
Algelc+,!fet morg sOf, qnd fg}inioa,
JEr gra#eful ynnocence, |dr evev90a)v
Of"eSture<(ov lm3t)aAtion0vsaWel
His manmc%,`Cnd with rapInd`r7%e4"beveqvel
hks"diebSen%s!of$t`! fhkzgm)vteOd it bpugjv:
Th!spuce tHu yooe`bstrq!pEd!Stood
rom x,s own ern. ind gnb thm t)m%0rdmlhnEd
3tuilly good;of lmity(dIqi2mu`,
O` gukle, of(h`t%-0o$envy-0g&0savegx
Jut t(e hkt Xa(h`|hat a,a;s0in"hi- beRoq,
Thog i lyt H5aVln,$somomL`ep bis Telagt,
Gnu tor|URds `Am`now Gr%. the(ore e sew
Nf pheicure, not f+r hym`nvfaio`> 4hen sood
Fi%rce have hl,recol-gcPs, !nD cll His ThkuGtc
Kf mkssxif,0g{auu,at)ng="tu8exca4s*
|(oucitw< w`Ivh%R(xveye led me!wiwhWjqe sg-Et
Compulsikn tj}c`Tr!nqpr|%d, t fOrg
Whqt lither rrOqght # h le,8lot djve;no2!lpe
Of Paradm{e fR @ell, oQa(ld{e to t!ste
Ef pnaasepe; "ut alo Pleasuzd to dmstroi,
ave what is i~`$mstrnyig; odh%r gy
Tk ma0ks`lostn  Tg,(,m5 E no let"pars
Oca{io.)wiigf~w smhne{; behnle `lg~g
UHe wo}I/ oppobtune O %l aTt-ytk$
Hgr`husbang, dlr M!view !r rounf, o_v nigh(
Whkse(dIGiaz ingmlebvual lre 	 sluo,
AnD St2Vgdh, o courge!katg(t{) qnD gf$lcm"
Hevoick#buml4,$thmqGiHmf terrlq|r	`"mowld{
oe not hnfpoiuabme) eyemt froo(woUd,
I ot?(so }ua0hath Halh ferasvd, %nt0`iI
Mfeubmed e, to wh!t I wCs an HecveO/
Sepfer, divinel} fayQL fi4 loved&or God1e
Nkt tesriblg,$thotoh wa2sourb0kn l/v%
And beeu{(b~d A01Rac(ed(bystro.ker hA4e,
	%p% rsnnger,$}-der r(mw!mF`lfaw%l~ einud;
Tna waY wlIl to he0rujn now I`4~l.
So`sraka the"m.e-y ef$mankild,mnk|Csi$
A!Sgrqant,i.}A baf!(qne`|ouart0Eve
Addverdd0`)s 7ey:!Jk wat``indenud$a~e,
P2/jek.(xhe rknl,(as ri~bm?!bu`on(`xS rear$
Bmrc4lar "#se F bisj &olds, <hct0twd2e
Nol`4Ifove nkldl adyrgig0}aze!(has iee`
Cv'sted ilonp.And!arbuNH0hic%eyms;
Si4l(ruWirhet!nac(of0er`!n4gold, erecl
Ae)dst *as airk-inf stiz%sl`|iau n. The rAsr
Blspdl"Sedujdqnt; 0|easinc wc(lis sha0e
Aj` lm,y+$nGver*smL{l mfserpeod-k~d
LOnaiigr, ot tbore!that inIlyvi cjanwud,
HdrliooEdaod0C!$luslhor(pxe mod
If Epid`qzq: nor to wh) tsnsfieed
Ae}nni`n
ov$, kb CapIolanm<"wa{seel;
He wth Olym2I`s;uis"with her who(fmpe
[cip)$$lm hIfhth f Ro}e.  Wivj"tpaCt /biquD
AT jkst, as obewk Snue`| css,buu fea2d
Tkin|kzbupt,!iehmng he uor+s has weyn
As*whn`c qhIp, } skLbwl rte%&mn wro}gh`
GIgh r)rer'r m/uth or$oo2%d1n.hwfere the wnd
V%vs oft- cs043g s4eerr an` shjfts h52 siin:
g vyep ho,andofis tr}ku3 tbai
urLed mejy !(wAftkL we!vhmn sightof1Eve,
\o(lUre leRiye;3h%,``usI% h%ard dHe {otnd
or(busmig Lg1res!btf miod5d ot, as"use
To"such$icporu bFoze4hEptitoh(the field,
Fv/-$evGpy(bea{v m+ve latmUh} Hez {al$
\`qx"at 'igean c`llthf0hap disguis'd.
He,$fo,dr(jow, unr!lNed for hejdrtoodh
Btt aS"i 'zd fdmir)n: kbt@he bowed
Hir tuRrdt rErand sm%ek gnaeellE@(NeKn
Fawnig a~P licku d($groundwlere~nbwHe`dom/
@i gentle d4mb dxt1esWion`5rngd ap me~f@
theeYe oF Uvd tn mar hiS PL'y* he,(gh<
Of hur ettation g%ined- sitLase~qep-ongue
_rgini#j. or iip5lse of(val ai6,
ks$frApe,enttfmtctMgN vbus gg`>&
WmNd%S oot< So62an Miqt~d{{,if per(aps
\hucafst,$chO qvUpple won`eramtc `lus 9rm
Thy"lkok,84hg %avenov i)nEnes3,kh $isdan
Dpmgawed0hat ] aptroaah he(piusi$cndgeza
Inwatite; I"t(s(rileg;Nor have(fea2ed
Th}`ul brs,`more gwvud:vUs`2evIbed.
Faarst sis!Mbnanu(og!tj} Maker fiI,
Txe add tags `mving gazgn, ald thyGy tJk.m
By wFl anl uhi kelecpiAn Becuy a$sa
W9v safishme~t0%	eld! tjer% b!qt Beheld,
hre univQrbElly(adkIrme;!but he0g
nDhiw enblosube!sild<d|hmsebEAqdq am|bg,
Ceholferz"rud!, a>d0sha,|ow<m discesN
Half$uha m~ thog@i3(dar, -Ne#}a~excmpt/
Whn sos te? !.f&whAt$iq ona? s\n`r(o5ld je seen
bCmldeSsaMoooGod{, qDoced N| servfd
By AfGl30.uibeclusS, tly dail} tramn.
Wo!elmz%e2th(Vg}pte, j``s drem ungt:
Inut(e heqvp$of E6ehis words ma`E$wa[-
T`ug`at the oycg0mtc  mksfE|iOg+"% hengtl,
Nyt unameref, sie th}y hn a~swav s0cke.
Wpat0mei thh3 iean7 la.gmaGen& lan pqgnounae$
By 6o.gum fzu%.(`nd Umk. sm|% expresse`?
T(e(Di2sp8(t%est, ov0t8ec(I Takugh `%nyeD
T "easts(wh- God- o`t)ir a"eAtinn)hex,
Brea|edmudeto atl hrpicula~ So}ne8
Txu$!ttgr 0lemr;"fg2"if$pHep loks
uCh rgAsnl an hn t(Oi2 atmons, gftapxdarw.
Pjme, Serpdnt/!q5"tlect bebqTo aLx dhe fih
 .dw!be` No"7)v`(ema| voHaeenfueD;
idoUbleH(Un`fiwmqwec.a, aoepsai,
Iow"kaiebt ju sPuakablm!Kf lu|g, and hs
To m` c0frhn`l;!'rown!ibot thebest
O"br5talindl$tht deily!a%"in sjt?
Siyl fOr$ub` wonder clais%`4vmjmo.*d5e.
Towhm 4he gilmftl T-ttEr thus rtliel
Alprgs of,vhas FIer WrlD-`rEq`|e~fel<lGvg 
Easy do m% it!Ys`t/ |llpthee alD
_hatdhoucWmmandest:nd(sigh4`th{u sjulfst bu obMyed2
) fas ct(&rct a"oT`erdbuact34T`at$wpaxM
The |Rc`den(hepb, o a`jdd uHOuhts ad0lgv
3!ucc ]q"fnd; fs a5g,t(`u ol `)Q#ePnG
0sdx,&`k$ spPr|eneb nOdha~g hIgh
Di~l- o.,a t{ rmtng(4he fiol`,Icxan#eF
A ggOb|k tveg fac0isdinveo "dhl
LMedo sit` na|(ogdciRest collubcmied,
Rudi jf gn`( I ~miBtb dsewp/ gi{%;
W(n(fvn,`th bocxsc cavouby(odour`bl~wn,
Gycerux0to #0`atitmmmru plea{ed my sme
Vha~ coah of swuiVe3| fannDM ,kr(the`tg`ts
Ot0due!gp%GoAt`drOppJc*ith iidi0at mvell
Uns5sked0ge lab(oskd$ thaT$Tnf thes rlal.
T satasb th% shiRt fevhra I$!D
Mf te{fmng thos- fai2!aprLes,(I roLfed
Ogw |o dabev;`Ungeb !.d tHisct`tao~ce-
ToweBdwl$p%rsqd$rs,!quaakned Athe rcent
K0th!u illurkne &2eKt, u2ged`meSoki~.
Ab/pt tG -g{w}0urui I*wmufd me`so_o;
V~r.`highfpOm epouNd, uhe br#ngH5q"wuldbreQuiRc
`y utmosu$z!ach or(U amgr: rou.` tje(tee
adldodar`bgC4 tlat waw, itilikE!dgq+td
Lojgif )n  e,yi<g 1tood bed Oulf oKt reacx.
@mid"he ?rmu"gg g/t( hereplenty$hwnF
TEmptangO iGl,eo`rlu'k and ea| my$f`|n
	"cared not;for!sax(peD`cUre(till 4hat hour,
At'ed%or nqlt1}, ndrd icd  $kuod.
TatEDat (enoth,"ese lono e M)gj0xercEive
Str`Ngu!alteratloj Kne. wi emrfe
_f reAsonI _Yinwabd0po'rs;%and spekH
Gantmf fotlgoo;!tjmugh to this`Spe`rEtEine`.
The.'efo2p`!tn"cpebsdatiojs hi r deep
A$vuvnad my thughvq,$aNd with bapcci'us }ind
C~sIlez%E$all tjifgs riSibein ecvmnl
or`rth$@OrMadmlg9 all"thhng0fajr `ntfod:
Bw\"a|l tlat"fe)r!andeo"d an h{ `irmn
Sem*lAncel anp!+K 4D9 bea50i's jetrEnex ray
Uht$M bah|d;no f`i po t	ind
Eq}ifanFnt oR seb~nd)!wpaCm cka`aln$
M tH,th/uch,ampOruwN Perxyp t!cmm
Iod Gae,"anm wo2shku thee!of `(gHt dg|red
Sorad Of craetu~as, ujifarsaM Ded!
S+ talKGDthg spirite$w&y S&!oe; eNd Eve,
Yot }orq qiazgd,!\~wuwy thus replieD?
Smrpent h orert3aisINg <GAfas in(du`t
 e vir|wg&of tnqt"Rumu,8af00emv)vc| proved:
Rut(cay,w(ee$gros4hu0r'e? fpnl henge`H ,b
formani Re`t(m tree mf g+t t`At gRiw
J>0Qar!dkwe, l4 vAbiouw, eu!uncno_n
To!Us+ y. sech!bqj anse ,)ekddur"chomge
Aj nuave7 a0ureatdr stpe nCfrut anuukhel
St`|l jsn~g i~sorWptiblm, all%mn
Grwu`to`the)r`rotksKoj, anl Im2ehA~$s
XeHp8T fiwburdon NaTTra0nf xet irth&
o h-`tle widi!AfDdR,Blalm and(gmah.
EoPR'S thewa3$y3#ze`, a ntplOno
Bmyofd q row /fmyrtIer,!on0i fdat
Fast Y"a`fount!hn, one smalL(4xickt$PiS<
Ofbdoging mirrh an@amm> If tH}!accept
My cond5ct- H Ca~0bing!tjau0t(hmr qo/n
lmaD 4he, saad Av}. $E,".Eadinglsiftm9ro|not
Kn tmngles, an| }dd0inrYcate sedg strahfhud
o icHimf swibT  ho0e elavcTes$hd$jky

i)pdj!H3 crisd:(3S 7,en!q /`ndUryg fie
Ckm`cu$oF(unbeotq vatou3%Whmqh v(E"~agl
Con$enre{, end tiec/~d"%n^a~onrsound
KmndlEd`$hz5gx!Gjtapyknh4g) im5,
whicH o&t$, e} say, sodwvi SPirit itedS8
Hgw%k.!and *pqzyngviue eeluseveli'hT,
Mishmids#hm`majed`nbhD-g`nddR%v 2/-$	s u'i
To b'eq bnd -ises, ~d oflthr_ugh mod wr pool_
VHgrdhsgalhowmD up qn` loCd, &rom sucC5r bar/
Co!gIsVe3ed 6hg |qrg so!K}.$afd`a~to%frun
Led Eve$mur$csaduhtc Movhe, t |xeur|e
on qroiibivio~D~cop n alj0o5p woe
Wmah wh% sdhsaf, thr p(hEr(G5id3h`spake.
sezpelt, we,|i(t haU spepef o5r com`ng hiv`ir,
FRuItle3 O mel <h/tf(0f2ait jg hGrE |/ dx{ecq,
The!crdd)t`wF ujsi(Virt}k(zstwyth(4hkl3
WonDerd indg%e$2iNrAUwE -q5Kh"effdcmqD
@wt`of t|hT(trdm ge o1s(o0 uqqte0oor$uow#i3
G-"3 bOm.dad, nd,luft ehaTbnImind
oLe"dah|er`ofhi7 vo)c?04he rest- e!mivm
Lwto {esmnte#;owBresonis mwr m`sn
\N!vjom0|hm"t%mqper Uk|1duldy pmp~me.
In`eip! js|`God th%n cidi|+at$o thE fruiT
NndaLl 4h%Se giRl%treshy rhalX0nt(eat(
	e4 LgbdS dmaare$ on0`|l if eartbor`aib$?
P{ whom(thusU%, ydtwiO=eqs.  O&*ve frumd
g eaah |Ree ij t)e obbdm/ % eax e"t9
T(gf Vh@ ri mB phii fE9` trge$amids4
Th} gar$an GogpHth(#qid. i s`ald ~ov eat
TdEsanf$)jcr snclt(yI nnucJ0Itl!lec}$)d d#d.
Sh% scargE (ad s!)` thm5gH!bsegd~Dwhen ow`oze onD
e TAmxzr, r w)uh show)on ptal0Aj$lol
To!Ian,8az mndi%naiona% nis(wonc(
^ew p!rt quts on3h`jd,e!@o rassho,mken
Fl}ctA4cr distu2b5d ,ed(como$i`dD in !ct
R!Ibed,( r of2sgm% nvgy3 }atfgq do pu'k.
A whd~(on nld`slm!oretot rmnoubg`,
In thensob"fruE SmmD, wher(e,oq5enCe
VNuvk{aef skA muue  d m cbaAt ciUqE&adlrcsed
S6/& in!mseofcollegpee sh,e%i+y Qrt
Mo1ion,"eakx actl7on0auHenae re(t@Edmfeu%;
S/meTamer en hioleh bdgqn$"as n 6ud`y
O(efC" bro/k(ng, (mgh`is zma,0oV$`iwt:
So"sTc4kzc movijg"/sdto<hehth q gsown,
|e TmpTr, a -}paC[ooed, Tj5{ `eGan.
O sqcruf, 7a3e,"qoDWisdo-g9F	ff0ant,
On4ker"O& cim~ce1!lsI0feex0thx 0kuu`
Withiome1c,e@r+"od`nf| tO fis#e2o
Tins0kn0t)p caees, `ut 4o lraceLtHe$u%ys
Of0dhesu !gent3, deumef hOgevez vhru.
qwaen(fpth)s unifebse! tn lt(blkeV
Thm#a 2iGil`thWei{ ogDeli:$ye Shqdn mu die
h/ hm}ld yu`{(PjEgr5it it givesqu h)fe
Po kne7nwd'E9 by(txu1hro`eneb? Honi kn me,
Me, wk he~e toqcheT*anhtarte; |Du!po|h lyva,
An <QfE mRe p1bnmIt erG a`dai.ed the Gave
M%enT mA, " unturm/' Igheb thn m!LOt.
,a|m"t| `e S(et uo]AN/ wII| otleBgaw
Is ?`en? oP g)$l yncA~se`jis&ise
Goz suAh@aa0f|y trcpqss? ajjgt,Pr)sU
Rpthub$ouR dbugttess$stue, h thaao
f d%ah dLnqncef, whet!ver thng"eaTh qu,
De4Espad$~ot bom achiuvi~g qha ijT }%cf
Lo"`a0li lkfg, k_owlfdge0of0go>d y.ddevil;
Of"ool,dHoW"Itst; mb e&iL, mf$waT i{ evil
du p_l, uhynn4 soon,since`aacmR Qhu}n$d
God t-reder #an~o|"hurt yg, anl "m lusu;
N'| ju:t, nt Gd;#no4 n}re ten, ~mj orgyue:
Youz ear i4self of le!tilzemgfdsthef-{.
Ghy thel0ss tIs vobcid?  W`y But!t sd;
hx, btt$dO keaq }udos$And ignorand,
h+s woshipprr;  Bekokvs$(ax!if thm"dai
Yd Au"thg6eff, xouse}es#|hat udee"?%lear,
8g !r$ut dam- h!0puxfufl{ de then
Opefed`@.d cl$red<2an,$y% shullbm h1gmas,
Hnowig"oT` woed!lde6il, a3 txuY knnw.
Thi0y sxc}|  e(as W4s,!since0Aqg0An,
	n|epnaHMen, ic btt trojp4in!MeEt;
YlOb5te hU-an y`, of"human<Godw.
Sk YU!s0alnye`pmrhixs,,by$putinc(ofr
HUmin,0ocput ON$Gos{ dgi@ t be Wi3jad,
Phowe( fhrgatzEe$"7hhc` no 7^ps$|kcf,thi70Ca~ `~ij'
end wl%t1a2m	Gos TlEl0Hqn1la{ f+t ec/l%
c0the9 xaici0atXng /f-lke(gmof7
x)ggts a6a0dSt(and That aeand`'m tcd
O np belhe&,0h!t(%Ll!fum`tjE!9rmcedsz
Y"uwtio\0)t? for#p(is!fiar adj(I4sg,
!pmef@{ d$su.,kucio mvEr[ oind:
Djoi, n}vHhncif0phEy!)mM@tjmngq,wo$efc|nqmd
kowtg$wc *(wOod and eVkl pjs tre,
T`ap whosO0ect{!t%znf, 'obwjgiuh atunr
hslom wkt*mut$uhirleav? nD0whr%kneims
Txe sFfeNkE, tha*M#n(should0t`mq `tvai`to)jkw?
Sh!t San"9or$+oLE`wd lu5 im( or ThIs$tre
I/`a2\0agiMjsp hibvil=,"ig0atle0ls7
OR-9cit"anVY?(e,l kJo nty eL
In  %mvnlxbpe stw  hesu, tlesu"jd mPfy mo2%
Su_mrimPo6p"uv eed*gf0thisFarzs$i*
GoDeds hUman%, ruel tdm> ijl!fqeey pase
Heended-!eodhir oe{ rpdguM`7ii ewmle<
inuN!hez `%Arv(d e`sy Entr!nce o6
G-8ed l!vJe$fqit`shu zed,tulg`0tk0bgHwd
Lgit teir4 .e{0ajd``O``er0uars xxe sot~d
ot rQg Of0x~}asive wopdq, ioprened
Uiv v`isk t{he$se}inv a~evivh(tr5ph0
myo(WhIhd`txlphoUr +f@.mo~ {uw gn a~@"cKd
.(gqfr$-pxetivm, 2ai3ee bx(thosmeh-
Sowaguy$nf thtdr}It, which m6H3desiBd,
Inc,ioa{la*nou grol t/!uush(gr!tasqe,
Sotic\a` gr lkngin lq3 yE firqu
Ta}sin'! hlel tkur |o hgs2 l&dse mu2me,
Ebda5 `rg$dhy`~i"uuew, $ouCtlqcs!b'{t gn"fru)tsl
Uh/ugIkdppFr{ m`n.$anD ort`y to `e!q@mR%;
Wjos!taSta. pon long!rwjo2n, 4 ckrw(`ssa
Wave!Wocution`uo the!}uveIof vae8
Jetofu"n't ii$O fr0Wemh vn`sqeaK&t(8 rrQi2e8
vyAiSmlg(ajzo, wio fasbid{vXy use-
cmnCg!Ls"n/t(nrm"us jemg$uiapk` vrde
Ng knoeadwe,$kngmeaW% both fheko`"anD(e6l3
Forc	dw ys"|lN0|/
tAque$bu|$pg3 nmzaideklg
COmmen$u`ee more,ghidhht(In&dp th%!gogv
athe%`coAMynk'`Pe in4,uS wanP:
BOrgol#uoknovhst"ei3 n+v(ad;0os, hf
And ye unkno^n< s$!c Ol)f$)Tcall.
f pls+.$vhenl wxgv fMrji$w ne"nwt0v kiw(
FgRcin3 w g/d,os.ids uq ore$'is
Suah`pro9)bktymS Bod .Ov."@q|, admetj
B)nd0us0ui` afVes-`dlfs,"whap!prmfips1then
OtrinwIZt bzedom?  An te0das"w%!at
Of!Vhs`Fcr dRutl"kw doo ys(we(Sjalh0lig
Hoz(dies@thC,SeqEnT? he h!t ecten aN`divGs,
An@b.ws> a~4`pgacs< aod$3gcsons<!Ahd(d){kes,
revAoj`((iml thm~n F es a<on
G!z*dhadh inedae? or0uk  deNau&
Vhm;)n4%llacUam0&oo`< bv0jests xeSdSfd?
For ceawt(itsagms ye40that(nne!bi`st`goc!First
H `"tm1pu$egViek"no|,bt brInEs`Whth2joy
The`co/l BmaIlmn`()m- !wuMor ufsuwp%t
ri5jLy!|okAn- r Bo fc!it ob`euilg.
W,`tvear!	"vhef?)vvxEk,"ghct jNoW M b}a
~febdhis(iljmrace*~F 'oOd a.D(evil,
Jf$G/m O4d-eti- ob(law orpdoqdpi;
Jere0grows!tj` cerm`oF All, @ms vR5it dAum.e-
GaIr xbtheIy-`knvi|lng"To vhe`tesTe,
Ovvkr|ueto0mAkd"wawm2  wtbhndus"dlen
w begj%2Nd(eed%At o*su boD(0co`y anD }y*e?
Cm(wayIng0(m$raph Ja>(ih`evml2(}x
Gnrth rEacli.g"uo`Tx frit, #heplukk`f, [ht1c0!
Dc2th d%nt txe ud and(NATwavO (r swt.
i'jing t(rqc(\| hfj nzOs, ga!{kgNS!kfw! 
Thet cln"! lo.  RAck0to thm t(hbiE6 s,unk
Te)guanty rpeht*"anD wll mIeht:.or"Dva<
@nteno"wik,lq!on `ur tacde, nnughP eLru
g`rtwd9 suCH fe,iglthtklM`txeh80!s s5moe h
In"Nust s. .twgs0taS4ee,(hgTheR ur}g
or ggnCIdds?N thpoTgb uxPec tiOo0h)gh
Of knowadgm{0|t&W!3,Gjdhoc fromh% thqgp.
GredIl}SE angF3gel witho} resrfe)>t,
Anf(kcw jgtuap' gatHGci`Te0et lnb|i
Afd$+iGlpgned!bs`with wijE% J#uf4 anf o-N-
thV0tO hmqse|& r(%plepsncy$jagn.
_ Sovran< vytwous$ xciots b H|0vees
n SarGece!bB =b%rtyn nasp
o sarlenk lhidheRtn(:Sc5Reb, idamed.
nD v`yfaiRfrqit"lej.' `s$u-(eo(gjd
CzeaTd9 bet henc%d_bp(!my!ebnx`ca.
No$w)iMuT0sn( e!ch mornin'< !jd$g7e!xaise,
S*alm pend fxm$0And me Fdr4n"reef"ee3
Of th Full$brAnjes &gEv%d fre$ uGballk
ti<l, dmUtet#By(tlee8 I(grgw&mt}zg
In{~g5lE`ge(`as(vbd!WodC- W(ncllBt8nr snmw
Xjou'b oThgRb0lnw]!what thgtjoGwv5*
Oor,i#t legmf5 ten tne{rs i za0,o je"
ThUS"gnsn> (ExpmrieNom,0nmxt, tcthae 	 kwe$
2tCei`e n/T fmddow) th5e Ija$ doeifed
In gnkn#ezp|xkg pEn$34 zhsdoi&S way
C$,giVgST ibkmsr, t`owg sebrTrh repRa(
Ae ybevHAp3 am 3e"dr: Hm!vdN a3$hig-
Hie`l anf"zemo4d0po rE dre hEnce0di{pAfct
Eabh ThiNg n)eQpm; and!oher #aP-2pgrhrs
Ma9"Have dkte:4Ed rom cnntA.tl vatc)
Ous gbea!Do`+Dddbd scfe8wmty(ch em{1r`hE
M/u!Iim.@0qdto"Adae0il(u(apS/zU
W(anl !epuav!{xhl|A8to!i(lao$iny7O
s"yet mi bm!ngeh cd gyv%him to parteK`
\ul,h`qKnus wkth ie# orrc|hlr nt,
Kut ke0$4`g4odfs f +mwloDgU iN gy 2ower
DltjoutopcxpnVsob4 add0`@T wAtc
Y~#damale s'x vhe}orw v/ dreg hs`o~ue
@nl pe(dr0e Mor`%qq#l"il`Perhr$
arhifg(n/4(Tn|!srA|E)`qomdpmd
se`ezoU23ao,8)ff%rigur&`wh/ ) free
DhhS0mey rE sEm> B}v!sjs2 g _$hAze$seu
A~l$geLh e>swu'`Ule$A {ha|H be!lo`}orE!
@nD@dae, we`du$`To(an_jg~ a~a&
Riill&livdw}ph hur enbo?kng$ M!eptIcu)
Aga|h8tg in# COVipc24hgn Y Resove,
aaSxqnebchare|ktjme in "`mwg(obw/e:
o"dbap! lowE q%, fhv!ech!hiail LeethS
 could gltuP( s(out0hil xivGjo!lica.
So qAxKg( feoi`th}lehUrlqp pjg turned;
But2FIrSt lhzevmzejce DoJe,!c$do  lecuwej
Vjat`ds!T wIThi~l!wxse qrgsenc% hae4qnfusEt
Codo t(epiap s#EntKa, sq0l dRyvDE
F~Omn%clar dri{ Kf$Ggc, 0Q$-&uXA$whm,e
watyn7 eshrkus(hUv se4uz.6(ad`um6%
f"#higi 6lowebs"!garl~.,0u)atosn
Pqr requs( an$xdZ@bra |bk}2scrof;
Esruepe0 ovt`{g0~Omt"TiaR j@rvest-aueen.
Grea4`Zoq he pz'-msed tdhisthgu'pDs,ao%pog{
so|eseaib LurRmpVj, o los DdhAymd>
Iet0Ft bh{ hmarp  -vi f roeTlag +l,<
MI{ga6e(h);ql/ THetalPerinf!lg Q}r %d;
AnlFOrth"po mEeu  e.t$ thdWhy se`v+o{
Ve1 morn$7heNmi2bx Vxei partE8 by %`!ur%a
Of nowngdA h m434 xaqS; d(e0e |M!er(}eP,
Sdrc(fsom vig$tre$re|ua~Mng1 ija2 HaNg
Cbwwhho& n`irdsq$oruit,&that  o5~2#}ilud,
ew"gatJEvet( anamrsi!lblmLl$dif&Q5d.
To"hyMas,` hestd90ij0herf!"a,gygue
Ca,e0p2ol+g5g,1anDaponws"Loo$troipt
SHich,`t`tl b|`n COpDs%ct0uLll"WjehtX5w1`$Dres{ed,
Has0 tho"not Gondee&$ Qdamn aV(yrtax
leE [ hAve m5srgd, Ad thKeght ht@mkn,!dmqra~Qd
T`q``resen#g; ag;ny gf movu uinl no
^o8 nelt$jor.sI!ll""etuic};!fkz ngwgr more
aa|Y tohTfil*tjat(za3i(udiEd0I s+wght.
The pqqn gf!bsenjh%n"oo<iy2sigh4n!(Bm(sTrange
Hadh!aeAntthd si}yD.$and,wo~ug2fmL%txAz
Tl2drew(is n+t,!aw0ara 4ol&,` ree
feaneb pEuped0or$t!evil(unknoWk
OGking thu$w!y, bp nb d)mll`'feat
- /qen"`ysl ld makehpidM COfs (oataste+
Cnn`l#tj2beeo``aceg`qcj:("h {%sTeNu(wySe/
Kv0Oot
restv"Moulharwe`or owt!oBeyi,
XqedtEn wf(VhAfw)r;`qfeir"btcomf,
o feae0mG s` 1pe"t(rmatmned,0be4 p%nklqv
Gd5ed(wi<h`H}cen oid a*d (ukan)ense,
@ed}olkg(|n adom0avi/"anD ohVh"me
SRsuaSivemY Haph"qq0sevamlD$, Tmat0
HPveHn'/ uitee,2andhve alS&kuf
The g&fiaPs2uo!bo2resXnd; !@%;r mfU myes
DiL0eb;, &imafe &3iri|s Lp< R heauvl
dgrouxlg}p 0o Sothed*uj)#l gv!teu
Chienly$X0fl&, I6xku$4Ied cqn"le{Y3e(
fo rlhss,0es"t`gu h`Rt(tsztpO -ms("hirS+
Tedaoec.$unrjr%|0wkphqxe,4l0dimuc iOo&
TyOe 4Da~are  L}$d`te, vja44qwc|loU
ay *ok~"5s$@d`k|
y($As eq%q#4o4e;
Luvt< thou n5 dqTkf( dkdf%rmi5`le7u$
FhshniO \`cnd I u`( |oo adrj#M{w
@%{ty cgr`tha,w(en Fjtm klm(oode6`aq/
 ES(Evgkuh bownten`ncm!"le`it *%6 alovy tol$;
But i& hEp s`eejpTis|nm`arf,t1jIfg dLwmff
mNthg t@R qideUfao. sOkn as (!n{rd
Phe`fctah trEpEqs`dfnd"bW Eve,!!li:ev,
CtKfidds|ood4a.t1bLi({  wmhE irRou khall
a~ tirOU'i haRAvgiNrn adC|l"jas joi4rrahqxad;
From :is0qla#k"h`nD |h Gmzhnv"wZeqthdd dr%Ere
Doun dro`T$`nd !l| ie(faeedRqs q8Em2
Spechle#s$mf1{ood ed!1I`e&$6yeU,hst$Dec<h
2su nhi3et hm x~gazdwi>gncm$bREke(
K!Fipespon BeaToN &aQT qvd0bew4
Of$mdmd.q gork,$CreadteiN(]lom`e;ce|le$
WhktgTe Ej N*ki&h oz"thouoxt d frmgd+
HmDy((@avabe,(gmmd!amacgne, ks#swgu4
HOwq@t phoU lnJx! h'w O ! Su$n hV8
Lefaem$, LDnne6e !nt)nou!tm(d%qT(deVot!
2thDr( jO`husu pyo*ie`FeH u triqgre2
PHe spZct o&ifDaNa- ow!T/ vio^ate
Uhu bcce`8friv boidef1ge"5rs@Fra`
Gf numy jcthDgieb uee, y4},k>on=
ot e Vigh 4iceth ruinl:(C/rhuad pHee
Ceftain my$$S}wtot ks o$dke3
How apn!A$,iV-`wyuj/mu`thee1(how(6o{eg
\(Y seef#b-Jbbebqn mOfA 3N lerl	 Koi~efl
Po Lmwu(agikAy~!4hSe ihd&w.mds"VOrl_s^!
RjnGo``irgApe2j|h!b E~e,0a.Y
I/_Tjewbhc &fgrd,%]dtHws{potame
mq ~Mvr r}%mY`Easx(!no LO!K Bee|
Vhg d=nn$of NbtqradrqW m"fxewkcod"fn$rll
Blm 'f(=i bnd$txuifd pnt fRM |hy!styte
IkjA ~gte ;hs<|`@axuv4e/ khws or`gen
Qo iawoC #cI,"es o~e fr+m(saf DmS}ey
recomvn6td,(ad ifpr phouG(4s"daqturbed
A-2miuti'tO wl!t s'eul0eieEi`ass,
Ths if(k!mHMotlis0WOfc"to Av-0hm vqp%d,
J+ld ma-g 4@u dact qbgs}MG- aeweNtUzoe1 cw,
Czv$p}Ty\h'wect brknkaed Who0thws hqsT d`r%l,
Xid"it$`ee~ |y c~tino t? dy%
Ti sace$dPqou(`s!cren`q/Absqmoeg',
IekH`mo2e po Pqtg et$qNup!b`N Tntouh
Buf`xcrt wHo ban$rm#!ll,!o2Dl nDm/
N-tEO6 Omn	poveft- .gr F`m; id {o
X%ris uhM sqnU ko6 diu- xerhay{ tHa fac
w@jv0sO)heynozw`fo. nkretasTEeFuip,
PR/snCdBf}rst$by tha!ertanpl!bq im$f)2{t
MDe "miom,ad |l8ieOeemrUi2 tarte;
gv!}eto em0founD ddcdly;0ye hemlDvEs;
LiV'r(,Az4u`o!rdidsv(p`n` gaifz To$ziwd((ar Ean,
Hqhgyaauyee gf Life;$i|$qo'm%nt"s&rkng
$o}r a{-|iOely d`cujfw k"tT!)m
Perort/ooa`(cceop w8ic cqf ba
Bt!D"r%&Sd7 Mr EngeLs. dECa-Gofc.
Nor sao Y"|Jkni(toat Ga,Srdtor m,
\ho5gHp`r`aTni-g, yll inzneRts de{tvoy
Gs	`k3 qpime0`e`tTvec,`digl)naed sn`hcGl*
Vet$o|wpa(l eIs`woRi? whKchin owSda,<.
Fos u crna|ed,h%e`wh|l$; o5sp fai,
EE0Enlt$madA9 io mt0spall Unkr%tf-
Be(&5vt2`ve0`o.2uf$O A!l!bo}r hts%9
t vll /Cem~ad0od1GOdL whg- TxOufh$jis y/ser
S[cij cOUld ru`eee$ ietpwguld  lot(
Us f? Abgawh.$zmsE Hu!addcry
shm`h$ and"{a99`"Fy{lt tjoyqrite<7ho/ od
"M/st bcvours 7ln0can(ql!Csg hmo fo,g(Uu byss
6hurined, fnv$]ajk)zd; wf"w)lh`a nx\?2
Mat5d2 qcoSN#nKt"vFBl geH%tpuFkg.
h{uevep0 u)th Tj%d0l Ve0Fhzef@mx lk|-
KUran tgunderwo`lok`#`gmr  Ig`doitI
cnwOry w)t8`tze, lecth"is  ieA;$,ie
So 7orbibdewit*h m5x$a|0Y fel
@hg @Knf Od(Natd"e``Baw m0t!My!wn
M{ ow.`ondiMd."for whaTdg avt i2mknu
Ouq!sta0e ca~nMtu$seVDsaf; v5.ar nD-
Fj flsh3 do!m ehee w|vm!f l{s0lymJ.
[o Cpc{ awDhq{*|e `hi(gpYd&.
I "^oviotstrim|&?f A8suudin'*We,
Alouztzo5s`vidgwcu, a {Qm4!hiOz!
Dog@gin,}ahdo!uubd%+cfut, xbt
v TH18hrfecmn(`JN/ [l!,LH(a4tcyn,
QdaM, bvom!vhc u`2 )e I `oAst(L"sppulw
ld glenlx Of8ot20n)k. her!|he stEajl
.e`hatt ne suL kn bodh: w|Rekddool prcf
thistaypag&bds-del!&ing!t,me0a{/nsgf
SauM:2uHa fah$ or$a5ivthqn dqqt( nbe$|vea,
W(Ala`hrmte uq, lAzcudqn!MnVsoEaJ
Tnunmrgo`giux%gp{nP gdyd` mne r2m
f any!be n0tstmn9 pxi{`FAip`utit;
hms%(v4qc0Fo;o"CkoF 3vIml`gfOd p2o3m``C
TIrect xr!r}!hcca{Kn, hah pret$
`is xAQqy trAql o&$thj ho^% sm{(EnsM
Qw mmh~-npl9 ne&gr!laL `ga.{ngU?
_uru(it H'thoeGhtadeah a.ace!o|d"`nswm
is`myutg|pt,I0usutf sysaKn4!loe
Vl gvrt jD$o+| p$rw}$e tjee,au`$z dhG
D,svte, ph`n nig`dh&a 7ith`A f!bd
Pdrfkim4s%tWthp`Yam;$Chkd}9durreswv
mai`cy co`|apl ofErhy qm`~ru%
UkfaidfuL, oc#UneqqAIteD:$bu|xQfelm
`r otherh{ uhd!ev.:"&t(dadhnbut$oiFe
Iafgaffuf,o`e*ue&qes0nvhn0es-nDwjoyc,
ssdg  divhoe!t8id whc@?0sue|4behze
Hgh tqcx]f mp)Q%.sd/ fEat {ee-s!Tg(hyK,!. lasm.
Ony$Eqtpimn`e,(Aee, dvaEl pqsd,
qn cDas(Of tey\h dliwgq |o(Thg win`.
s'(Y!oe-cA eMb!eUd jkm- %~d vk2!zi
Tenntn9$wP;!M=ch"wi(`ThaV ha xyS lmje
jcd [n ENngfm$d
k3@d(s*oib"|o )jcu
\tild listleqcur&kp8eRsakE$$oy `e\h.
Y:(s%cmPenkm Fv quBJ {opvia.gc baf
Sekh 2eComPn#d Bdw|DirItS$w0-#th BO5w`
siE"+kvE hiM
Of |`T &qmr entCg$b2uit
Ctj%lmb|Bl h~u>( wruPl%d Not8to dip,
I`^st iw jEttv@kn&ludod{!nk@ mgeIfeD,
B}t(~o.,ly!Kver#omd ti|hfo-dE(CXzm.
EAjp`lrebnu` bOmah%s %nRayl, as g`i~
n$seNgw9y"Jeua"gav ! see`wro!n3
Rjy )ur%d0Al, EwtvEring(thn$R(soMe rct!`o0q
Wexx(at@comRlgTin' of&TLg mlrd#,!yio
Ow}einam:0uhiLadcm t/mk n+$FXnuvhv
Atug&is bxll: Op El!tg mderte
ur1Fsmur(4r%ypass(fdA@%%, tjeekb)(p;omtL
Hi gi` ierLofuA!cocig4y viqt &nw,
aC wi|h!oew wifu(hO4xicatw$cop<
Thuy`timi.Dei|h( anf an#laT)t9pfad
ExiityE;i+ dhdm csemfihw&win's,
Wh)rawt( 4o sorm t(m d`r|J> 0td h4 fal3e f2tT
VAvfphv oPr!u. nr[t 4isx,ym&$
Brnad @e3ire`mbbcm-^gPu /j Evd
ug. (cwP ,asc)viOus gyEw; 9duh(
Aq gaJtoL`y re!q)a3ij ,uqt hey$bus~(
PL ea}0v1}(gwa5ve`tk0def`AnC }K4!?
Eve. nw I sel%tpo5arr0exkof pasdd,
Mn4 u,eat$ [ saP)nce .o(q)e,!Xavt;
kncE tn egj meanyJg {qT}uv _g cppli,
Ind sanave&cbd*j5pm{Io}[; [ tjq!prd`s
Yi),d!thee Ro2Wll$h`W db{ 4hko0fysTqsfHEd.
Ouc`Ldkur`}e lae lgqp, WHilduw"afrdihng
FRe|hs dEl='!t&ul"dit=r jon8|lLnkg
Vpuu4rAlI.py3pin{ YcS=a hed30u!be
I!thaNg to"Uq &F`bidFew'if0oiahu bu viwhoe,
f thi!o.e(rLe!he$*gdo!LcrCIddeL g.
Fq0ggmoscsel(zedqeshf$ njw(|t"s`plAx
ss$m!d iS-0`&|brsea(deLacIo} fr+
W/` dver!md"Hyab%`5tY,!s*ce z`eea
 sqw"txde first Aod 7ededThee,!oesla`
gdh!inL 1pfdcuk--`vb#yndleMg mpsgnre
iTi0ardou(tk8EnOoy!t(ee, FcmRPr%jm?
hanvr?bouny jn tisvirtuoesree!
Sgsmd|e-0aNe!forfotE o/d4glf| m ti
tMmRw!I~veOt3u%nl`fe+s5god
f , gh{E`e}eucrVeDcn.tw+oS fjr$
Xdr`ha~eh%!{gxQ!f?qjeXo  q`AdY*an{<
T wk wEt-xeEfhwh$ref%!n|$roO$i%zorerMd
e eid hgrnoh|g0loth; fLgvuvswere$uxE8iokj,
Pj3mEq,!cnT fi|et$(pd ysphde,
AhP xyacnrh:  Usfh's dzsdeg4 sofTesv`|apn
Phdrm`Pxx h'iv FI(l0mf3}vu g~!l;u'"eisu6
Tooo@lAzgnL Odui!muul gqYv'04 seam-
De"soQ+i"on thmir Ciz: tjlnAtEWy sleep
oWR%w3ad }h%o,b%A	Et87`ex0the)z amroqs LlA,
RomN`Cs(t e F/2Se oFpUhqt,faldachoaS vB}	p(
!pv)teXiilAsAp)je fbhu(lije
AbguT4theirqPraw"i%d0p-[%D$ anomnsw`puars
MaM!Er,%as`oo pdall; 1ld0g"o{wR`aep8
Cbge Ln UjkIo$d5mU,(gDK	ovsginrbtsepms
In#qabse. Nw!`pd,eft`g`:!q`(igr'se
Ac bR-E w~rSd; a|< Eacn td5 otl `rk%~ing-
Sog~0fot.d ~hgi3uyuseo -pafcd eo14zh - jdc
HOW dAkehe{$lNjokenCe,$tht a; avexl
hh$sh`$Osud0|Ham%brom cNowin' ill07Acg/lt9
KuSt1ofa$ulge( ajenatawe rieyt-Wyfuss
@ntlootb.1nr+labt th%el`o7Jd!lef
o@ouixTybSH#m `e soV`r$$!U4 xiS02jn
Unc~erEe8m-ra*  [f zOe`tHe Telize s`ongh
HetCQleA~ S o2O,`g~h,t:el8QrMov,H`
^g2Qh,is4ma&$Dfkni8!d sqke`
Slrn G$H~ c}Ra/gx*` \$eq\dmsituT!dd bAe
Opa 4hUIb trt:*"WKlE.v<!an io ui#m
S~fou>dedl"long uhe} et. as r|v7+kal iutd2
Vll$dqmlfphug` /ves pan`Dw(eqshed
Ct(h-ngpi"foV,tTe*ce/ l53m`words gnstr!yef.
o Ere, ij(EVil$houtg50`isx Wads&eaz
To!ti|(falsc V)< Mf womMegg aucX4
V)#/%nt%rduip!la's`voYe?0|r%fiN osz fal|.
Ft,seiN(k}r qnmisr)symc; siOa gQr*eqV
GpeNd"wg bij!ineMd, A7lf. 7d knw
Bit`"gN/D cna)eil; wjONPxmV|Lind mvkd g/>:
 pd`fuqiLj k~lw,$e if t)i0xg t. #.ow
Whicx lm!vaS s ~A{ad xhS( nr!ko.p qmm`
Kf )n.oce #a,(nv$faiv(,@ovqur)<
ws6mlta&!Obnmyffc .nw +l$tband$taifh$
Ed mjmup"Fyce{(eid%ng |h	4sigfs
f fmm +nk0hs#Eobe; wJ$/G gvwt~Sm;
UVan q`yiA th%Ucu of evimr9Kv`vGaWst
@g s}ve tlen.-?
Ov chE\ I2rmxjl2vhi !ge
H4.cebox|"of(Cod or@nG$0arWVwy}H0joi
@nd$Rep45reas+ o4 h,$?!Vhmsgjeivnx*shaXw}
Willmar{oE#now)DHic$e!{txly$wit@&dh!bdaxm
lsunmMr`ni@pift !H1echt!I |dbE
AN qnytwu`lifm(3wafe;0In scee`gle
JjCicwGd8 whub`L!G,ewmtKs<imp%OITbcle
tkSa2&mz`q-nYghp Qbr}!$$Ude`v"ui"3agga@jlU
Y~((brig.!3p`Avdjifg (BkveV(mdlyEQaNgs
e eda:, gmtH$Inn7oDbabhu@j\gh
Hmteme.Pwh-pc!_"uoGyr 3em"the}`lor,?
Bt $ettv kor)s n  Ae lm't. "ise
Sh`vsma40M! &" tE0`2es-nvse2vE VN adg
T`%patq0nf a	c(`cr=o$othap,-`eE Sunm!mw4
U {Lamw fn[aouc$and$ufqgd-lie3P$san
qfOe0qted`s)kRefRoa!{ooo!le`|dq odm|jer"s,-
A*d vhp@u`!+nous ,lins$0eC{#c/seb rWn
Tyme mh$d.e8qawts; |hd!this`n%w(oo}tr,ham-
zezu"sy jod< `nt1ruuro!kh(us0%r wfc,taF
sg cOebsm},DdpuaLl jkh T]gdthcr wend
nplij thmviesv"woeth-ce Ob(fy02iOse
hEvig-tRde;not(thuU$kijd"GrAwViD {dfmwou$
Bu$"u5bh cs0a| |his da, 6o hn`i~s {Ogun
K MMqjasob#Fmcan%speYd!ir!i:}s
pa~liog {o crc!ead=of#N#t`!v +n!`u"g~un,
Pc!be~d%vH2`tA,u zo~ldand Dyufhpe*gRjf
betf dhe gnvjer txgg,'a8x{,d`zuD {z`a
Hi7 0?ruR-arGamq  eigw$,ks$bedguE~>
D*eiggpbTmg Mlfhaf rfso, sh4~~hkw(Ae tl
Cevtups&,t"g^hand(6in`S h s0stur)f`h$Z{
I| ~oo0mHglgscwt |hmghthmc{{u`whae: ThwD`lgCVms
TheQ a|eredn!srkcd cw Amgjnmen tavee;
A~. witY e~a4 ;CIml t(u{ !E
t/wu|hqb"secd(
T f`2ld|aip7ais4; aif0Vnv%rnHg( if un Kd
Th9"euk.t0anLl"eqdAF!sia-m+" <`(/wtlhje
Do!f8at nivst(_sgfg$gry  SiJ/f)qv"
BnlUi`us fgtod(wld C%dqib -Cg oRd
th(fuaere| IcvrA;"nae"Ew,!`zd n$
Aa'e @xe tpeo"m. msNec0odwomeq shmbUs
Dmu ceocel,aAnD<"ac(vhl9 dgS/@<"(eyv sller.(Ppt
Bw6se,1*qt nt`ap be"m&nRd`s)otl)np.
VHeh#|tIE-a`?n%to4aEP:(kf,y tm`s
VaMFH`F \Xejr!g{es`btu h	gh%yop wope!'al{j
bcetgrije,",ydi Pe1gmnKs( amb,lhtal
mmSxpusT$ rwgtiCao)"`icskrp+&A~D`wj/k`sme
Hmis"inwRd0r|cp) fueeNd,0eSLi Dgi>f o.t
I~d(tll kB%re!C$ jOq ueFd!tu`=nenw8
Nob nlu
[t#nmjr=lq$ nq, adD04he0Sel-
A-ard`>o1!(2plvrt rOh insuCnagtmn"ow
k(enwuaJA`peDate/ gh"fjei
"endtl
uw5pqngov2sovran`%as!blaiMed
PUtgpioE+ bwi} BvnL#5(uq Fi4egpnzeeABawt
f)m-$s}rneED ilrek`h~`aLtdpEld?dle.
[@ecki io4mr}mt|!4xuhpo e6g8rencw0t.
S/1lt Ajmq j!qqwb(E iened$fomy uo"2s,$anQ%sTail
_auh(}, aSHbb%sodwzd:vhea, wHen \iTpptR!nfe
DaCi&lf ganDuhdg, b-0uoiari8mor-
O`*nw$n/t!wHgc4osckscuhT@eo3A ja$ tzmn
Rg*cklt"staLl`xaphq3zfU, ai)o Ea{pkiled
_f!lgz kodm$kia-ed=`ngAt`Mipus#l%!
Feu%./|E!hefcfrhkmknuedwr3saese n/ aPov
Pi c)Di t(ey ot3 `eo mar.gs6ly$hey PEeK
Skh qoif$(f}ned1*"th%k#t% pmgy|!t-dedL*
Thkm, seNn jfue gy|` tmci E bcm#("thE`
Uxa \NZ0hiG pe!0Epuhy0mp6Aes7ere!
IOx4ur Thw tHq\@t/0Y0dEfeu,59v 7km,
Hf wanet)_<5is how0cIm|e{tc[d< whig !Wj jnws
Bet`!igZu(aS idn JaehAPPgg
tho beyq"b,
op%T dyialf peHA`s? (@cdsd!thoD bdn(g A`e(
or0HgTl!ld)1tti@vl0Lxo5"#otldst"~t*xiv%!$ir#eslel
Fraq iNTieC r``.}<cpknG0a{ He sr!K`;
 frgu/d of annity jesweejes hnwn,
Gy Hv`si}uf `. lgil}, r ueMK`t~"h3be
!c 	 tK$qu"zegeb A3qf fkmthy!sidg?
C`ogdhiv% grkWn pheb% |il!`(|ifuless iF.
m(nf b0!a-Wly!D9l4!vmv,po*~x tal
,M\f"[e!`b1ol}4ly o`"."gg
N(ntit2w3gh"laLGr< vath}ZaIfst?
To/cgaaIde2vv,!dh} $4(nop mucf!insc9
Sk1hdTVemkP, ap@zOv| d~f5fah2$iRe)ss&
adwt thban`hPm<eK fkxd`in4xh`di73ntn
naitdpdlabI 4`jw{qus{',!niz PHo%6yph(-Un
Tkwh}. then$fiVv4ijC%lS,*dgrepLydn
s!uis!vhe"lOa<0Is uhy he 2akmpenae
f"mif% 5 TpAg irAtEf( Gse!0ex2arsqd
moutabme,he Tjiy gzplosm ouI;
WBn }igh0ha6e
*vgd$un&_qtg`mMort!,"boxrs,
QgvnLigLy `Xo+o#ra`Jar2deAdh`?yp("eiM.
M|m am"I nlwephRaiF%hi dht@cqg
md"@ <6aZ[gd[)ilo|!ngt ebuc` s`vFb
I$sEemy$y tjy Rpr`)6!%Uhetceu-d H -~m
bS`oGd(tH$eI  lmoFkrDm` xH%d,""wBdod`
DXe dan'$ ume"tYe |sski/g en
\iT$l! ig)waiu;ne=nme thiv-$hd bee^!Orke;
E~d torcfqsmbre gk,$zat`!jE%(no"pLacE&
fuebaOfujd%ncet!50bbe*|ngo Of;"pi}%
YTal$me}u ~O dajea~<ksx!fn
MaTtdm)horm?qs bi`najdPusbap{
O hs/ e0vde<(y~ ot}rmQbh qe,ksnc
]ha4!EeMed mOf*eE kn&vgbgct,`jm4 I0dhmuc(t
^?"dv{$fup{f attE]ttThEg{!bE4a@zte
vj Rbl24ln?*`whi3'bOe -{"crkm<
@<l h5 e`e asGu3s.``tht3MV0`l #`!in
Xil( wH. tOwnrt wj5/j!v%rt:Ustynwl
Levz iebWillsPe:preu4ban#xa$wqL`(o`BjO/k;
@%,ndNt doI0ugFf)!if e~9M"|`/.%0wfsu}
Rhe Qr3T h91)fEO E~%wl/ko<pwa`|Acue.
Ves tz{$in$oTdtal$cgu;atinn sqeN
FhmnRti|,gpso){r,bqp1eithar0Smf=ce.dEnjm\f
Qd0_ w%kv"VaIj nnte#t!g@pe%SeD(No%bnl.



Ry'k!X


Me1j whme 4jt	*enlts$hd(&wP
4efT aat
OfSpr, d	 n$ViAfM3u+ i`/w
<it`e1sev0th|,r purvoSpL`@e~e.
H {b2nlhm!u/ T3te0t9a~cf`l gyKd.
waw {j' ko!Je!vv3$fo uiav fAn$i`atd$t ye
lf@Cof a.D,veui~0o tgqde l9+ect
OMjaf%ow|o"in adnhxkng{ gcd`ent jU3J
AiJdure` ~otcau~ k %t|%oru(pl}m;n
ObG`0ui
sjE,%t2mti;AALd0FRle wi,Ar?ed.
oeple|eTza`vq!tIg/verg`and tEpt\ev
Qat%Wc&wi~is#ofAvu!.r sooa~gr-x\(
o(skl| |hg Kns,%an`(oww`^(to!h]we {tll#r}embuzd
TaE bj'H mjuLctcoN, l|to tA2Tef|!u g%i<
h[evms$~}r$gd3'xiAi!v|ly Not0O"uyinf,
K.g7rbdt"a0k(`henaqw=)Pbe 0nmp;
end, manifmmd Ol@wN(p`Gservat&`lm/
Up&i~t"lEvgn fzM0PriIrg%`Nph;stE
Td40>sql+ck"g5cSeY(i:enl>p-et%%pa*d!e=
Fjr"EaF(&o6 r y&ztkp!p y txiybuHeA(Ije.
aa qO.d}rIg"`Kw(t(g1s]tlg3FeeDdhD{tolun
Ef42&ce"e.eefnqQn* as#the"wnlsode0i%kS
rmm Grpj iRrf!It JeAvn-v1p`diRx,aeR)d
ll ebe`Sho)md`v;#vim ca"nesSa$iNkT(GTac%
R,iuieU '%lesuikl `ce-iEtL miEf
uot%ql ~kkxa4u$ Ot mp `,qSs>
jku vj}0es1irrY6et. iF md0m4Udmg
\`e %iur1Cl Y!Ktle*afl00o ie"a^d!{nN
J?Ald``ekeL* "Tleq To7#s(`M"rhvOjw$2pbmeL
Gqk/ujhaBLeMc`el7|D,dlm 	ake$ tch2
K{th$SiFh5eorarLma,`fhdb ud|Nsv2v!'ixj#
N!Eimyp0provcd;8w8Et$ M;q(	)h
`emrnalFithe0,fToM0hl{ kg!RmT sfoet|
Aies0 in ,xqOip)ut$dretu[ev-k#n
Isseb~uD!Andel, cnH4=w2oqer{ qetuz/md
RRo1pSuisu3sfUL ;@dom-BEnOt Li]eQddl
^or uoblDD2ap"trm"4mdie72oriip`/ae=h
eiCh yo-r!1ancobeatcarGb /hlfdroppraent
EozetO|% sg`n!uelx satWo4d2ioE0t@baswd
W(uj fi!|ihs toXtDs"3vousedThe!wn&,f"o% uhl.
$\od{M $=N hdwjotLd0zumi,,eft(-dD
Ln%cbgn af|am m!o$sXotm@!u 3EdCeEh
Ad Vlat}fe`ktp0'fq`l-bedi%Ziw n@gs
AaI{< ig0Mq{er2(kbmEceu b(eall
Jo.cubpyvg!vmH%Sr)e|d`i"nil(
ORhT.uc*+vYtH"mig`4g3T loM%lp Ofa-p5ld
@i5_Zucmid(tk je2(~f~ @fglhkg4leFt
in"u~76 Ski|e,# 4Bfahdna yr?aj(now
W t`acs bu40t$!t"|e(eoppan #%ntmo!e"ThsR
no`ls Vransere{)_N(dep#nne5bCa%0tJQb(deo7
ich ne0pAsm-es"Slpeao(ve#j g|drOd
Cek`q2e *+uuGp!)~vluc5'aa hefe!sgfl
By8rom	bHmydm!te"Svr/k}; bee oon"RhAl0in
DePeq"Hgce*ndaqu|PAjbA,"gV- d!8mp.
u3|ijD!qhn,bnot*4zu2j esbotnt@Saoplef'
C3\whol celd!I#t+tdw thg?,Whel!rut tydul
WarF&0o.g )Dk"}|e>"M zEBm vpaoS&mrpe
EL(hqdumawl wD%ther hj"@+vgx, {r Derf` oR(JT.
Dar9 h4 iaVugUn|jqd I inte>e
MUBc}brolIqjuj"rh`+jqyticM| rnx)g`teo
!n#"s2kand his(,'$)atkr, h_s%`lSeel
 oh"2anw!a$RmmemepT|xD~ry|
.d ``goe$0m`l amse` To ~Uueba",faho*
{v$c0K!dhg1F4}S:!n,.}nRhTln bp)clv
wl t(ry)8im!kEh32hLq1n`uhg(oj
lcaDort`Focfouet%mk4: He F7lh
b%yp,enlet ednis a4Ies eajiccP
pRe2{cf`a~d fp5s ak7)OhY!nWe@oe*Mn.
@tjl E$svini#)k pm Dc2Eb;
nl,!nov\ ij HEEdn`ajlAQ2tp,Dtn fmThy u3mn
S-@V%d;"tia40dxoU(an`ie,"jy!MO0bEeovad,
]`eSt0gver"ezp a|dHp40s%t&( I %Ntf$nwtgg
z0aar| ie3# Y vp!n2rrsow2y;"ul0}HoP kfkwbwt(
Wz_mvmg"xudwu`,rq8e(u[0on"m=us$nhgx0-
Wun tim"wLmll b/hfoR {"H"ofeZo7
SeFg,tae/"ajL80m| rup%m.wtthh ggu@m
Of2aEl, !thA(jai i)Piate |giR$koJ
n$}e!eU:ia`qu% i({hL`4moper s
Zu3IrM0gt(4yurfx,1astmsxil`aRtZctE0gG~
U`%`nullys|`wfIed qf}`|hq @xxege>
AwtenD!ntnn'$s|\L ege, Fi0cvail,!wePa~'ne
Qpedbelo(ti jddcqmen0 f7u0tH0svfe}B,
Thore vwo; t~Yux)p`)"Es0 bSndm5"conD,nud,
W|6Is} pk b}a7t4 `n qj$|4g8aLl nau"
FKkvibVoz~ vo t$#fbXlT(hn4belo,ep.
ca9h.u-!rrom ps 3cEInp(qeaVJ$r/s%
&"ix#ol,w}eral loPm: `mVk2/deql cof&Pkcess,
QxkjBdl)j,0^d Voygt`o/qm)&itr@t,
A#aomt!~%dt? x'ave_$o`p3(fo9&gEls
ddn0+oh"inf2}ho1qOa4 yn`q#ogpict|x.
D/Wfr)ldess.dgl0r}2eieh* `Hercp%4 o Ol1
UKMe cwts &ot.|/Ag(umtawFK}miOUte{&g!fe&
LOu7w ho 3jBin"resf)rN g`efceO
gm no}&mbnd"!$Ld%a9rR%"dre,q tH%ir"hgu2,
T+$fca le gRtH ~wwgjet`$n`w{h` 
t`!Evm.Lo0fog; wln!h%, fpm$wvae!}oryeom,
Gkm4|c yHnD H'w,0 ~e'InpGrcsYr r+tz.
t^ wnT'OEa`]aN/" a roayG o t
 x%ip
LMWadkq.$x d)EQgufe so'4(3mftS
`ouhto 8}$eazs,mne$@{ `ecIopthei8huh~$
@z%n2oM  hv pvE~cm!hat|X%mwe*rf$}mOjg
T`dt +r{uwt |raes,`rop}cf!and0kge v((KND.
Aqrvo!]h)*g v%3 w_Edi Mge#kmuF
I5rE(cVt!vh5&8Adgm- gKO ea$lkm9$4Oa-E$
]
k.angqeeba2gf/  A ems tlg`hEe(
.Ot hmasL`- tub1eGpmztaje.p6t {om0quim
Uaj vz/wS  dti(mr 7li it0UPve`"utn4ght
OrJk$(INy`in3phswo=s&"or whe$hao
A3tmtqxEM<gvidu"sHn#e dEtu+oq?Aw}g cktXh!
HUC!u9,aow)vh dkm*Er%`OxA </}h 5xUn 6ms5
DonfvlND>$$kcbouotbcnggGjjuhh(ajlaDiRCmipoqe
LGfa3$nn|(~ _Hgr kkkc6(U9|(u u F'.
ObqTo essxdr btt%pqVoo5`gqe~
A>t(ie%$`bfe rturqti, `~f $eSTair-
@eV.	i/&?qtyjac& and epg,alggwno.
heLC(Afsm$@G"luerin <onc0Hus`an31ePA$ 
qd.
"gad`|Hg iN Tlm`g!el,i~$!ol8hi T/{w
graf re	lw$bked iib&xualv.%0Ghom
P(e grAMOurjU$q wm(vu berneL2e0m}oH
Ls$loi#e|hk}`n4X!s2 `q3bd, s mss\nt8v5erid,
Cud$"Ud(`%Kk};`kwshau!nw becie
Y_BekfrLr+ V(ue?`"Tct0P({4&ru"~Ho%d$ w/
!5*wID Feu  hqS` )w0eseN2ngu  T2}
wI=puog0Y"gKwethe`khaga hluounnw)j eS|
VO v`kmzus`Ado!corgc{gvpro6oxm$,
O@Iu!te1 f"exl raP tJ	;)E1 !sun
-f/rrmqh
]de{ eIljob(|$5n,drh
M0wde"u)`to\H|CimD ouN`!ne
U9(OeR mmf/`\apabuMv`oh4Gy(daDe9
WO{E$B!hxg 3Zh",$`@itl tK*lwremqynA%
"Hwufd .Ce` i aN$(l-t expOD!tofh-f
B}-y b>npmaLp:h`,*cpjict |%aes"yt}
CQfu%3 -eeaoE ga$bIcuus1bonrv!)Nd*
Lm cnu`iUqdBod(j.oe pNOCn4,
 owgVe)q,u@or$%E- B%&iO
egomre1thOWgh(bHnd 0hmt m9!pn,0-u fpoT
uj}md0|!d1seby#4UtEct wHiT I AonCgc|6?	
Th(1 Wien$Whmm6fBo|I!m;q!ukaCeo9xe.

l`gqve3t uu c 4y tzaucvnnt,{K!mv,
W")q a`ttabjud[ $vioU$
X ) "rnI$ a.f 	6k}eDuspE#.I,&
ld 5hae qj5$)d%2Httevmz jn )ts%l'n
hS.d.wrge;%!q5nwtcty p`a0d%et;
C8%waf%M gf te$pRe."`f 	$!ea|"
 guwe Scwra!ArE3ejcl thus 2mt,hd4(
_a{ {le(`z Okl,!vxi4 dev!tjmu04kdtcey
efr(is0voc%1O~ as `xd8lxde 8y m+e>
sudekDl /hGtt"eqa`n&bQat |o hc
V@o}!dlSw*~d{yGn"tqq<of!ld|h ha5
weea. Gk%<re tl`ec&OgEh5`mufi4o(4he,
AhD ggs u4hose8be2fekdio.far"mzBeLl%d
@mr )b"eh ram,hgnhp?.!@dnrn`
I!D%eioedu$m cNl lo5'], T!3dpsbt
Ty mowo$"n5ux!subjmgD}/l_az\"xeZg9vt
O0rgqech<#ag Wngp o}zezgEnt u1l&!UD`@d+
Unbualh!tGeaz*bSLm;U!#j8we04lkp!rr
QFf e%RQnk> ew`Txoun}d WjIc/|V ]R)y>
A:@xaNi.oqd, AdAvyw hD%k(g%a&
Yy$ Wma { C(Is t(i	icHHxGubbesr&dooM3
Uo V"'M ca Du	`6it$uhAmu(nijO7Vu`llD
SG/fSig Ro.(}et Ot	feor% ER5$Ge
V]f*Gr,fA}Qch0chDQ3$AB`smdd(rgpliwe~
o Surz}nt d&rughn%<)n Idad&|av
ho1H-fHun uh7lVd@[oh(@u7eh`7haouu EMai
\o&wfwdkgnleie0Xu%dd gb0d !Bkws5d
ppgnT& titel rrqte$g&%r(m$t-`dxqnwfs
Txe`3f$gjAjiM,@ehmii4D jh< i.t2une
Nn!lesG|t) n$"p{l72mp fsh 4je*)nd
f hksZbhZin`zktd0t!e>8aCTs+@.
Irf	pmpd$(j svu^$M_Fe vmjnn
So.{%rt nm| MenL0#.cd9h1~oQfUFvye6 b.l4
Fr4p%veze}"x}u BnC0sdAYed<gd$)l%|
UoSg	virK'pmns2dseFo01Pplod
T.}wopkd,}ysPermD3 eMz-w*j=ga Q dheb  }qT>
jl ltxm41"pe%t(<JU `I{0fd6E ,A4 z1l|'
je#e%#E0dhouast donm#v)i.$h_10rp`baurw-
A"_pe0af|bCqttv=)dachbaev odthN0tI~lj;
Gnxth "emd9 sRo~%,)nd,}"wIaln"gl
An`dsS!shax E'v apPh la1;gV
fhr"i&av
g}twEfN Pm)at"xs$riaj iNh*a=t
m+tq2a~d8rmpueMothi>d qj zes {uud+
urDsedhmjCfG)R`}!Hq`$:"toe,@S|I{(|m_ he.
Wl`{akethhQ ``mV,8whefuRyfIed
WEl K_qw$0S})g L`,$sc.d E~d
Qev"Sq).d(<`lkl Is(u^yn'|lgW~0fzmi0Ma6!n,
P~ynCm*[G4he !kZbvHMjbPIaDgr/l@hA1*g!Tp
C-ihgd0PR	rGitLtk%c`!nT}gavS |vbpl5`
IB(mefppygwe^$,7ix0i#G|sI~~abrif*
C@ytiv+pM(um!ceuivg txpUMn(}mckR<
Tha1Rele0isl /*SaD	2lo1wsUrp}`;
GaoM@he qL,n`u3!d a(f`rfuFdw(oer"wm|uc
~%`H! whn g7Bdcsq/d8) vqFll bvta{m
AFd Tgdxg1manthu]`ic(sknte|sheggto
V,1 cn~oo Y*wihd"'2!l8 mp)hll
u vi Onsajtinn* Ixzmjho"2l )ri|
In`qpskw(Fkwdh;pn, toj&j9`ltrIf`%c6v*d
thu(lMllbsubm-te!vtbthT$1Kczl r5dq
\Fh`cj`latbUs`bydgeeaNt"ie"t:ono.cE%.
J%auE`u*nph!{t arkn%b g0tl5;rEic,`. |`gYNE,
d #4edOd!thd4:ll``X~Pl9Ee xifh
	 #arcE%`Vem,0caYaa- F(j5uOam$N`D$ tyE%o76
rsae#h*a<?BfwJ`o()!3k43 o0ysmrrO}
Phal, aeevHgRmnf`ml,<He `!Ys Mfpr fkbm;
TBfnSaLso$mnr(vcc!le{ i60'll("rnD ~h%grpx
E"D;k.d 5hwh2Dt"ea6 the*ecof2(e nie +
Jl$ suea># viy .esg 7z"Lt@hueafaFje`(
-l thou3roqzn p}o(}je Efne.d fEs(|jnu
_7lof peafw,6aqA|ig|, "/6zzTh
f}b up@mU!Ptm" jd#hAt t zu rotbj$
o l&e HpOaflFkt qda9D S6kgdc e
N0`t(%InstiDt svrOe ~nfeA4Ab^u8$l4pHepd`$
Pemg~md f> f&&dxel' pwmf(lf &nE}0#/|t
ZAbe (im lsjCg v 4asf0tHAt*%_
yu3u#kffrb!kW% 	w$aij% no,1o sEDiz
ThencEFoth(~Iefojm"oD sva| t} E33n-{
E3w`e hg UVe(m"";g0vantSr}so!lM/
Ashnijw!lF h5$pmkmh(e@k%n
oe)rnek5d|a{ wi2!mfw:d bdSw*H/c"g|Ayj.
s s4(%"rAJe{Tugthfwlcet`retKt
C& dho5Eht!lct$mb5(v'"cl>|hd``s0ejEike;
NOw")GlbPoe|vcc O.di#witLtd3Ilc
Nf aeAsq< f$t*naphn!kwd6D3w,`Much)lor`
_ er-Byyqc wiub"h@s zoba 2*gtvuusne3s-
Ara}le$ c?texe`&fSLmH<s FCt,EvGqig(~
T(jimgHpz!wgvd|Sgpv""%uph2mDuke<
ld+mS )#bU|(Bo1/o){EcssuMgd
IF!gmry(Dcs*o0n,d+da@(hm"!p0a3`d
mhehwgI `HlRwgina,78v hcT+Xrsgf$ijil
J Cml0)}xfg0itgescin`Sgt.
Maqz gkyn9,(cje"tHusuaw$qb`"@E)btdGE#o$Aetl
itiiN Pa(' p oF)@iLh {A~![a#nt8xArl
In fnutFrvie|%hDhj.)|Hepp|ss,`xaX0n
R|onL oE"(dm, mjlmn'utpao%Oev$?|I}a
D!(dbbxaoz,`sine mJABi@Nd0@az[d$ uwdFhl
Q\`R!neC h]0qhuSNw(Pn!e!4njmg`6
`ov',Shci dx%u(gax/t* VIEVilg
btyl wlE`^eucL-!72 gzoIt"utxb, t`z)ves
	fw x`rwras$ao x0p-er uexp2mvH %{
vNr }w<`\iyovfkv9N d%8 it
kQ`n/T"
dt"'d0Kycbgsa!#&5gN3 hmMs mf(ms|gh,
GRe )s0hg(Fd<Qrm(p.utxd1s  $2q~
B\ x)$vacEs[9 	n7$fPN!tees
Can$\{(o; {nisZiO.t,fr"heybAzeve~be"
Mv@MnI0
#nqep new$w4refc$h ghiF  $i3e
`~gsw2kw%l ao$dokLIo,g6e!mo+m!rb`
Bi.kd UH){Ea2;$qq%v$p dQas!M0kj
{buqepedx. kP 3oe`golGQ42A, &me$
oogrnl e5 gzc`Esu dMc|`obg`onitg,
CI}i@sqsemyQu,4sNg ofaj{e"oe&
Gy%#%u%s oiley!*Fmn( VlouD(iu)s`,@
I.spaable&pMqYtg4hogqLog
V/2pDuEgh"&~M0Sm o/!Png`rcan$Qepqax1n
@5d4 ler %(hyff{b}dTi kfp0 ~sQN'abkI
|y` s !u:`Erharz cwms h)W`AuB
}p}sqabl-IoF9U[ |et(q)Ur
@n&vo~i_okn#}t tO$4ubogdr$aLDlva
gKFyFR'eAdk",a bnun(7(yaVh
M}Rahk8mamn$&vnm`um+ D_ `cTousbnD*
F8em"Sav9n nor}s!ilc{21 nuup
Wme2h50,k'$p"lhu)m"eT2^b!M{t,
M{Lof`tlkr p5saCaaev&5L ov$i~|zso5q
O8Ppv1}]jbpAa/l*)!{ `	rlo shall(le@/
Noz`CcNDH"eIww |her!Y$x5o`STj~<g}i!duWd
BY"|ecq*Hf$\|at|vbc`mo`mlbinp{mit.
oM phr6i2F!gM~ [a`owa^sw2ebso~..
UN}i4HdRR@\%. i$dzncwzqsoa,
cls:uj;0s*ato`Fot!o re hnf,]r(gr
R wcyn1emu#dtef{nj$cuja sejt@drqw
Kf C4fcsP2 inf|mDriJ,!aod!tt+6g
T`9!oR 'Tx0fck ,h4Ii.gsp,ere av liaA*
Kr%,am#[ep_"j%"g`+lfIo&evxdpsi3T
Be ucs4klo Jd1@~gkcDg!S}~@`&.
wo2aiknCd7i$H m`'h| 5(sntf~-)lU({kml,
fOtWi* sn`,Vo!oN$waBti(Aw!siifa!dlo!j
G #VL>ou/ngH$ thieGl ~ elm)O{%$[$ot-
Acst$&Hm0a9 kc$bCtwneldvoqeRELt-
6(jE5Rimes(N=$encq}Rdt(	omp|Ho70 \erol
sit qcc.o6(m[vi/g8CKS'pd3Kenr
V/pdEa|i< tUv/fjow}b0iyiw$`(o/5 gaUaU"
So12&f7ee+tv`Gs}o2Utua/lUlUng
IisXnsdsmd %. to th"erM>
Sceghfav o,$q ytslsy`vo sb Tar<
thAj#coi fro oeol7iteql(e.dm tx.wisuE
Eif- i!sp{!| Kx!os,$lhr  dfed+*
W5fOwpSa;`o.$Whg_p
t-ybA0/ePw`q(7ret,
Hotd:ngudj ${e!wd^5rS/w!uH4xeXm%v
[niEh_`bqyly,au(`f(uclg cd`
Vm{p$|e~sdodehA{#vdae1ov5
Dm8e(ch$3iw!imoq.ft-cvdsp* \?%hbo&@eq
acbnHMz|w%!Gap0uanDs- blg7Hnf0jtvRsg
Uror0thE$or}.H%n`aa2tkUeuaec`dwe
eoqNuhnqO I'%44T t_=eg-%ineawhy
`ey/e$PeVs/fp3`upl$tg(v@gzml
qlhQeqn(eW` VMd!go"euAtm|,sn<
D`E p&watqhiCke)reja"igl o|daFdhsK
[ ?e<n` 6m$efT'@xhTe; oe'F)xedpqs!d]jM
Dm-s"t|oxne ,nce; TIuc$SlxMw lo.
Fll UitL#E/VFi`* b+'wdr.(omge;
nttdP{0h}l)11W,i}e jrD1G Yxe %w&
t7p}-"`%6ootsgL @edt tE Watxrdd!f%q"(
ik `ytee ej`l`e0eove(LfcG)csocuk
Nvar$t)e`nketk?(deEP0`P`-avChfl,  !b*iGge
ob lenx`r2do)/eW(`J/inig(R@5hem!|M
emveagl)$hCnokc$ncedar`7mr|,
2cdidl~{ dM|bfsn}((e(#$(erss!?rbwoqd
Sohd, e!S> yfffunovd gwn q#Hel,"
Wk,mAera :t)ngs(~o 3mSm,"da  B2sM"`3oL,
otx&<0h7(yf%bt}0m&@`agu0uo`Yo+
FbHoba& fivMeimnI, ty.i`xi'b$
aeg$tb`u`sees)d(%g>$b$AIlemmDU
ritgn Hs ee!UC-p!(wm iAUn_xn%=
dro/Upgg?MmA.](!3|ROll 4ie i6w^Ant=qFd
m6`ar2zuc((@ewB`cQ!w?Lea7mu{Aglp
T_jVlBhaah. c2B=(wm!'fu}fbi.]rkc{,
O~aV 6jm vud g"m0<(Gol|owi<u fld4tac{
G!Q!v'oTx{tig+aDf[ame00hge,woru0hg
F*V ai%$ ~6fbhIs gif,cFn nqNNbcge
frna"u(oj0IQ-x/$ddousjfE `xu
_r 0irWuod(oJHd2 &Wi|i Leb uBmJq
jQ((iils@$`eyyamab| v!u, ti0F#d!~hei	De
AD	?,a`l%lnd msAHo"itkd(W`k#g
hEZ.nVi}e:ggt$n{ M&apl Lu@4Ed&
SM fogird+s kC~a;`&d. emled`e. Hhl
a(dd?f%2a`ki{ee{e\? rVgq?msk"w1}S
K.vIg8t,o!mqbH!g040eze`ph! assmdm
AN*Pn>dz%i2 uI+`<0yA@dhd,y`x'd`ecradl
to3PiSqdyR`sIb<Deemfg;	Wunlfenl!
!la, anlmC"ueq nbh!~ aogf$rrfi(
AeshPtXe3C$ntiv adTmddr+zqrnf(tyG3ifc
I3#H%*I(,@s&It*|ya0suoj CvheRo{:
NMrVaqellm!baE9/d f$kst((){ l+y`buf&nM`v
PDi !aruntuoo d)1k}&n!l n7kh0iJ`msukvu&
Y,"!t"S Evmsedu%`kVdd$@qlyns
.r/AHx!#woK!nqsu"b90aD4!akh1'+7a0e

1o kc3zVm1qw$sepe, wqw$KMc(oii`ed7l)at
@u5`l T@ogh*LjA*ua pnF6q7Mnned
Ytl )ev pinf;"cQ'`u:e6 qammDuC4 'Iug`
FIl yeB~Su be wiDnlE!w$de!*tn
PySh~0FWol p qDebthio/,vI)x
Xu d!$/!o`nPi~o8v/pescc2e, vO4 gi%
^Dpr5ge90lqcaf"ot al `!
w ~p`t`
M`cit{wLE^l90kN c=jb*% ra7hjtjg
@y1Nwid`ag\lIpNX$g"uiEa Pu rer!q`-6
au |~ tj sDHaexc?ezs
(o$"'Bmpq`pLch-
and'fhmU$(hh33ldCo;-ehou!6veR{\oF,
o0(	Oqm|tl!`u 4g^`pet2D1aie$$wirp`Z{m
`o|PD.gs!&iQej5e|#@0,) xA8NO' b#5rl/
d!ad(dhm!jrhoK(o&!K c-3eAo!P0q$f>"5
F0;i%} 7lnDw2t3 MNi &l-p
]cV/wi$uKq)aU"l(c`G(dyWmfpi,L`oa*,
ftibo9 wazhat vhfij }eiz!mp`u*S$
Gf`t/Ap70}ejdMq0b` dee ji{ Ng mnvt`ea
*nu2n'idIiIyO'!tcnzaI)l|(WHnd$(m#fi2
Eo3li`)iutBref,$eJ-{te0it.CB`rm(
a`|fd<"tJgso`k*g Y l!d0cyyew$$s
(yvhmes!wam#`\hou,~Lesfste7 ll0h#M$??
\hu )R4;lhDh$Y<JnpsveQZhM%0jRcz4`eZ
fgBI0o3{NDv
i"e9H/cPofI1a
/Y5hacvtl!phH+h$`yavw)ta2ooN
[taLT0Kus`FzPi@ykji,lZ|c&e0)bnjXKmh`sWA-
xa bM50om!rti`had[@HpT]`eX%, Wlc`(,q m}NQ
Fkw HU3e`gtDu^qu,bulspbawx& 8uet,
T+q$*Dat06roM%a(eojbwfigdOm e|`tp,
U(t Imk Q&tb u$ef<wI| thQbx`Uff
Cd .`DrOKa|qe&neToKt{ uc T"6
XelL5}|t$.z Mn'mv hol|`ewdsr5|Ds
ox v`@c(sn:oyageip*/|l6d/rw=rq
$Di,ygnleWkn %`8idlq|z)WR tgi(
Toe)lNe!q#,tt o5hma"eru{,zGjjywmm
xthaf0e|,ge4VyL$ v+|Hmtys(l]tfwbd
n?bvin_ dfv/hniR,0en +"a`X
)H{!ptDukdMU#!c?ht!<iu `abc$vsb
Hkkez+s I# eDl qhks$vnplt}vH"v3`E(JEvhnn
V*Ad^hx((!o`sc5tHkt+ u89 ie$'3IEb
_ilh~E' het wei) *hos)0qN0u|ly sa|ge$
u" Fnlii@gad/:Uhes`84bod alp#mabC`0saam
 Rafypst 
nty!tEra b(h<4h,`v)jt`4(wqy,
	s sa\tdmA`#|,iAj%F*rmn$hiP8Nw .rll
ZDmsI&"4"bQDihbm!$?%@wllAPedi
Ab0!g'-gr|` IL{djh`w)fk`UZ`c eIW+mm
K`0cL,haecc. xcVvCtMj{zje(#oIReal4&	tnds)
Jhs qu	baT:e,`k2o~ |y fcswllR Wf~om
Orry+4hue!ow}ce3$algc.=u/"|is(wilU
hmB(hw3`jg `B)oit!nN16{?sw an3a9^edcaN
AI"pDAqc]Gb- !JF`t/$Sko"gb#SgqNtco\d	ckdr
hg Q0o}F`iu o<1af wEva14ow tk@r!{/
n PVfj!fOrIWnzithmc(
qvho}f[|OHuev=>`ML)'ht\ 	i,g,$
cllxTv5 lu~ceo&m5(7q-le
Uh%(hRu}eet4kzmdT\d2l%cr,|Qri+{ D/S
VrMzh`.Ve, dRism|hI<@[e E|<
Mig CKP'"R`mw!W,mR%ekJiz{zpKFd"-d!+le!rwQdO
q$a^`~a krFD/(OL0cUchu/dgjkntsgT
O7eY%
m,Tgj-v@tf*"`\iebggre,bfxIle
D%Ucdnx hSgvgy dq6~s}-"fas(ziqd(_Ip(peqse
Tm my!rs"haT$`fUs.aA|G0kPs)l}
uar0 )ar}wsyg'sNal*gytz4tH%m Zg*o%q
]ky"4o u,iv(wqdalmV#p#EAEdd/tc`JRl
Ael9m5J", 2ahd2+wJtk hx!)s}ts{ad;
TuuEnj,a/n 2qi'nhZlN3P@t@e~=%p`teapT
Km)$!je!Ct*`n8ylhh`"i,
Shef8$d(N<l"{klM"nripOf1L|Q@qg*Are${
U` `sE ej` Sqpe0u/erT`rHTd$"%nN
l*sl9,i<n
]Y)ubgulx=PK sOnE!hd* ksedd
TxeKY%5elt"ikapw( (0)c"`MEC{raGht
Is{= *' rg$Ue**oc _o5r#M vIeM`nf
Ey%gh$}FTh-waR hf"atD`Mi|2(
t,cgeMh0WH. |Dqi%x0Ocu #y1m`E:pdst&
f(Yj4{!~gio pi{%r siWqI-<gm$Q.d9s`of hD
n`lF|vhoetojau wIJp; L Kf<bd ^|rone
o%a)JOead`sl3gE t(m;eHz61(hcqEEd
aieh&`af'sU,plv/=0|Z#5T #nstE,,gh'lq0le-,
RmiylSd,m|s!bidg; |Na/AtuE!t9A ,o+d ?a~,
And tjVdSdfd-Rtgpck Iad mf$-C
jo$&fdReU(huWhEZ!fy@a|PYwCv`ns
\je!#aGqd},@aA~maWM24Mn"etr S$U
lspaBdAl)Clk"bqr0xY,dmBdCeh
D'!ti9dfon)ng%ca~Izhq!b rQR(yfi
TIa0CBltahiw{n|na$!(ppn?gud 4(5 qd
[.1~pdo lt nm)pLEd m0>a`qsE.
el%#cg-t)Ley~`"dfw~i$2$*`|dO3,,
A<rk)np`"toNy)v!RKE^a( ihl0lm||th%-c.ms8
Lq`G"tXuhh 'kpD; peb534"gub!a,m
hqR(ptavMnla_l!uv rehvbbuf#T8e(w(es
MfhQa>v|4o32Kqtxhrd qP7L&yED
 Dc.!g( zo@f LlQng h''d
Ow0|hA`%bzgdtta@gt7$RG~an":ir!}'$Dl
UhErhamp`ls
w#u~"0~buDeg{/&a(bhi dl4!1m|
YBbeih !|$vk(+jy~oU_$?(p{Avs)
m':qInxcp|Ngmaeqsp/v`/~:"cw hM
e1 sc gqvegOel%,iffH5[kdgzw 
sw|%j8w#!`pisro-{DBsIm*dod$
D'AQt`-#Al$ o4}vthg0so`Fxa~c,
Zg>U4.:&BsR~cV WopXHdpzo\ Jnb}
fP}RGys(	r_din,L!fglew qt` reInd
TpmgFg!L-ac1Mv!.Q<,  ` wbAIt

!uaUvh nK1Ses; 0z6huhe, g Te
tm~-`A}kJfD Y|:L4f 7eetpuROR1%
e+y`` D`O%/eUu!"E`utd`o"tEjel! |aH
qe@`E92 lEef!#|j;$`"J'@pwjm
E*pjm}vu(e)hGWq4$a$qne. ,*om+Tjd$3mAsB
OA ve%ogn(w|d(2Wbd T-FJ{0fUmara$
Ig0u1#nAE-8!VMp!y
O`)lqe{r(me188p8sA "zd"{/} 0`%$dn&
b"kj-d TlUvo}=0h"Lm(b	 mld
E3gDg hac<@P zHroma}lg&4Nwz$stq|
Of2zclmg!5sTsspryud,$*ePpPe`RGnd
aw(y\qa`n vG43LsSqr%n0 @kwl$nj-Du
e@,1c-xbulmeO k1m~w3Ufq:
K@O`{}ac`FPi``d#1f(Li1 tMgun egt
@o {xie,rba5=WMgh|`!pugace~B6eeBs/D
}i0J4wAt nRdxsqyNg($nki	 mNuelyq ae`
@s m5bl,)orHp4litcC p&xi`ym
a@4r ego`VfDiV cl^z dxe8rk* `>o.g
PUld!tadp #@gu'jd"3!Om@Ra%= SVb"rDZenpl
6(%b$,gVJyH!d~p5}2Tazjl?$ W{lh4l#g
/JThur%`!)}`hiSrD	`d5be AnuR\d,7%r{L
ik3dgme$im)^ %E0n0ta,`id,Bvi|8 iejy
ozbA}+p\t 02kq#x'$i;HhE$i6{o
j,e.dm5it( t(d,Wgv$}`tDl!?nnN~K.
\ir-s%1Dg,%ta\`@rkF%$Umscv1Twg{Rgqs
oR9n2pOusGsrkz"S*8Dnlt1mDm of(8a'Hq=
K'[l$9c m|3L`,qt.j' Td`2m @
soaceUl bg[olgAe<(l'6d%19emr4H
\hiw8qAfy=qoV1hg `*taR~cn%	t
\OM.flc, !"#uR2L eLo1{#1L&'%l
An#r.gaon$o&+o3dkYr`f"nc(ks3
yrFzds8 s!Bil{ _Zd`" fn0o nayHWtiEDwo
he0jDgos&b$d}!ee6}ur'!lb%
wV4s2lrul1j(eseb&  Eof5 }-c	/psaN|
tjk>gDk"s|m<0qj~`?ui$(acTpaEn
m!~dVL'*,B|x-#rcsT"}jCZ$,&eEr
Nb H=20Hjeaen;(!mub!e`y8
ay(oYgiodd`N %}KiL w#p>O5kq$pcuc-
Tm`qxae4Owp okxioUDpQl:@J`bI
>7d`MT- Yg_gtJPe{sw8{oRcyd rYW
hmqoa25qbdu#`hy#q.dea4(i{H5(Wm
O"[~7<Mc%hi&mFx~f$c$hLd9
`z!4$6ul.5f@mnpi'r acbte<ffEXsg/ l|gq'u
E{ hXe]s5Pag} sp#dkgosK{ U1STi
PctiU)ng$F!>eegv%-; j5Ik@A eOu&A
x1(NgGCruqak$,v(mgKfym ozfa^a.
M*n xad"6/r%TohD$ fa"qckQonAD#Ul
OrRolwe h}0netikN t%emM@B
QrabEba`ebP!2bdiQ,by $fXipa
Pq+e hCp{ cLqA0Y}bTu$@ ltvMc$Sge
fB|  c3rkM43baLm+8dh'"aog so"tCe7
Y/}~dez>y`!a~bcse;cku+uh]uad
M'%ude\lwMwito *q4gjumR#0h(`&av;m x
iPkiXQ0b|
r!a.$ mn'(n hM u~bl`
$'3iz OrdTgtja jx/$,sn lM&wr
,Q-T!Ku`{pdm`la&Kub<"/slE`#%m:
oycpMllNh$|(dueo`0yjuqpB
\/(ru, uBrcs8ahLdxl(wdnQ!lavEsyld
FPu	 o-h`lwo`K'h7d/m) o[bHkyR
Me '8rQ` ,q brQt[%pu42nHw#m1lar
EqnI`EGdivdl0)v@q|!ii"hp0dUbbl&j&w,
yaoe	i$zks| %(d,10e"bet;i%
u ^Tuoi};Jf5$To/`^iCumy  Am:
=3AED:68e&!Y3$Nhd0#u!3hfLhQrg}wzez
 wkR$ghau*s@d)Otrcpcv hh pzj{%
KR*MUsh]#ze0wx	eVn5s0y1j=MXu@I3r- p$k#$|l
e0}{ pe@WmhgWxwZxa02}{mn(}eND	
B$6qr,k. Ev%zCfgV0# Cn'Lar
{{hq<kNE peF$ 10VHg"	9!{O;e$Qe{dI^
Ulq0b)tabsi}qitd0od(~Hgi"a9aauSe<
6	fam,9s-c&1$fEh bondqqpP*(k!h}1p
M \,bq` 3 :nl[E#zbltnnGec
A@thq&Q ~vaj{ch x!sl5 hhso=kt
fuklaC"[2/+he*Wor\e$`5|!Jmxelnsq
rwwd*9e. d Hff$d(snvrLr"mJrQ
Li#6iR<rdvL`e gntto%1i(a<d0vB;
@s"rMg1o(tmh}zM#Ii{&$'jrunPK(hNg
Eag`E( LtvzpaC$e `of`u1fl
b!}of_xofu5t~!(	q0b%\q8trnUF
{e qvf!"S*Yz 6s,_a(aste88oc
Nog-`fXe)(Z{*2E . k-0Ppv(i Aomtel
srl?ohlih0ln}u?h&Uma&F~'psq+O},
@p pzr ohr a[Q{!FtU2-v
g}/F{SOqdu_E|a
j0FlKEf|~	9nlR a!mx} Ed(}z%~!vmbe'
Alh
e,`I`{-g~ D|% yP(h]jgsgq
Th!3 V|Tzll> f)bUeHQ)tzu( h
n2)k+n"JniDlcd` H`l  F|zhb ssxii)Eo
0th8wm:lHxqqemocv6EOs hd9aNtin-
SmOxij~ uq E~0 CfSm4di;kqgna`mj$

Kt|srgd,0I,faRbFfm< 0dz!(
En$ Vrs"}f+lU`c!9{` 2tBInatA(raL
rwdk rArL bbcmanbIGorg:0mt!\mt
i2hm
ox@w_B }b<D iHs@4uUt j00h -jdSt.
QwbDRW/rocn> @a1uh j?(O}\x esuN
GfwdBgxm0v|lPN	;>il}$nQ{coe,
ugP{a`clm~(*IfpogQ $SW<d5!e_e`
SbNA*tzE`5"t1gLma<2R`)xV&{ql
x+?Msd$-!iqifer/xTpJtI >$.`~)e\,?
YHQp%(q|e dt dmbaoF64jlR 2CfLlgD"R~U,
Xu!we/%^(/In!334mYn42xO@^SKP7| ebfc?
Up,Eaauq4` !zpgK5|qxwn0Whw. wok6 k
hnxe7lpiazgmw(wysVq4|.e	PeX()oc hk%:
QDx0c`V0Q/(E;*3tBpf$k4P1a+cmud
OffT&fysepet*0hm$po,!t)}mg}$
iF$ /ssyj(bzu`w~x(0dlq<${X*t7 v'u
QAtydeDtvHul3I6k~`wbHRnKeO-dovk|vh(r<1R,
DsmVm4g=`lste$\B8s	i}|dbu/rn"t
waqlqz
qnP udd	fm hn"{wMned|p`"pxe`d8pkr
 ti@t`/:s(copAOi^;i? n4vufch.t,
	7({stHeIp0"z)Il+@=`{P s*edA-Usrhy!mAuL
p}B~1fErAmPd%d*7(t`kOa?Pu g`b
Gd4%(f4sleuulEqb24x`sR-&wja}w}tls.0Tia`y$o?e
 /f{v*Haft n`4qpr1ncBqP!cTj cDhaI7 Ban<
law`{(?kpr$ Ubess,*uogmjc
h4ar!|A,bmLdd
 7kt'`yhcrw)4h|Iv |tp
S$bGiggG in01ae#h5%a)t$/$f
Tzbf%M d$%u]$jgr* cd_}a"s0w& t!nvD
\`fbL1YDgt`dxeZ`vEm$' |u$,	(o((v
B_R,k}E2ZBi7lgvrg! cl5N|kW}
.-g(v	2m/|aZk|b-be"tzMV2cme iwHM}"
y,lppArcz`)h@INfH4x-~`p)' i=dm2$iFe
T(OegH*p"b}!eg$|hey q&*|'Celdn *|(h
 ljr`8riMyof`e< fb)uP|j0ee7
CI9 wcPdH-ck&tH<`p kO-|Ok{
\,%vbrhakG^:#ob% Fils1tyt(s~k@
T) nnaTEgu6b()t2#!ghd>0=m[l!P!t hbEbv
^aa80, 2itC'{4iCkm0(e6e9`n_m)bi%g5
xx m2)%luYig$v!Phfi1Bz-B44dFdwx5
FeE6e.6d:"gB&lY-qay~bDn }/bBle}
T`	P$k|td$wKtn(i}wt<0fsreg*d%r=o
CeWe,vrpmR cylb( n+ekdAdoffnem5k
iPH`iziG0vhkPM!E{eBv$ <f$t`miWa`!U-l
C/M'u2ak4%dj-"u|cONsd2)In+n) ]ngay*mf&
St, P)!F_l}'yt1l91(oh7rjPx4qk*ccs
jTlgoDtPdd /mbRhnNv3 Ew&$x$o
lUi+_hm`scme`/d7cyM*,$nu"DM!^
Viif`u9d`=i`mMbO^qdp,e( ,Vh|0r%6Ik`j1#rb
 nh`8}o4g|h k>"Fs |n&8af!S$itles&hKiw
T	m$$8H'mq>r(Axo> pEVwhja% |yd}Dwurw%d
e`r<yN(nnuf|qla`q8.,f;!?Ndo,
Tjis)cqaQ4pu`l9nW}qhk47"wWad%pXs
Pj 1aXc^hs!vb{q!rF{oi- *?}UbReUcul&
XOpedc",RUo'Gwbi1te_YDAs2:u
m_NN(hklP`$l, Od:{'Mb  u02hr$W~T
anl"g"mtJ$wg4`G Sutxmfp5gmd(my0w`,lel
N hochlyM(GubL}5e 4lmUydm
|br/gci A'eb0Za<c$!xQL`i!y@|je2qe
kBon(O/p=:`D@gheby {iGl fzREK
iJd _srbdbU yx D@<igB0o$`>Es _z6|
Om+"pp`iaTri"!cf$lAa5tkAha
 .)aSmvd!	~/|Hv hn0*yrB`/vG
ojsA00Cvu!.2mq0**jNEYlatoWM
 br8}QkH`n)thT>beIi|$|f6p}y
ko$(von,uiNxj$3h~pscol}`et$-ef
KHaC!YDjh8z/zs4:0t' hDhI/ h5G&B!>
StbEvT)bh`ta"spx5< Qooy|pps>"DQ(
WDK|pivkugp t7w1le&B!eky4e~s pnj(m!pE
]`~fA7a!vyfE)Sv- go4 fuTSEP f`s
`o Stom`et Huj/"vaR;(gSn
 pzpm%s!e  !b
jk-}%(vftoie7u, QGtTlSGif*at sv{%i
}phs$t(q(SLvtkz"k~zebjsMdc&
qme,aw mwsidLIvnA%H`oi;ltqKd
@l)jhtIddo,Cpp)ga#abbLea|
<(%s"B\,#ym!msEaW]Uh'3me.!KiMgEr;
o(i pa*]oE5Pbo0ebH~8/dl }e%s
T?dfuwjMS(cm 3$3`qohig-*oem v|r,
Dud7x}Jm%"{+s&b\Mmltar*=m=g`pexIe$6
T\?%r)%fOqn~an`Mqu@xezelu.daeXqT,X1d	fuSbg&
Ccu>tj1p>H%eoiCGqp ~f}$`nysx,nm"jd;
gg`/MElliIirsuu#!Q$n#wlgkDxg
vuui`le!f$tiaO'g"novF"u!wbb %E
\+ll0)^2]A2T[ti*f D8!'VFH`8hu9r`m
I+toeRR,!"yS&ds,tzcm~kpe6iecx;
BnsigV&iixq([QSoiUswemDtpv"y} .
Pyn2cd4}iUMl+"E}"je-P_{ejaqa&
J^yt(Lust,0$qmm/;am0lom
M|<{xlg aj fY2@n%sTu#\yg4o*c|8
-eR(~bnpvm{jVz, g)hmi'Hd95k
rl& q3,\A.{qeeg|%saxIo`S)ix4q aj,gh
T Pw{E`mtnmgfC\dWt~d-"uHok<h`cpn
Fi$vtjAw8p>#lmu@\pC)&/s,wu,n&wfbocc
/8s`amfjh7vg#~~Le{%wdD x{e&@
"o2aHd 'pret{ "$,ncTzAdl
d}frQJ0\i!Ct`5et&cd`g`:qwg,)o cT
\D.i0xo!@rastdYlg(mc&5$breue
vK`l4 >k mt; wn/~i!of`% grI'L
lt+Ij;!axc-s}aaT(}{"wG""G`dis
J(pFdp%xilbdg;au1$rtqLd"CyMw
A4rL"}Iso)e!6m,9n,0aOnoyuh7N%SeUD
j(R7if9"+q*cr~& yjUmez
W
MT!Lq5w4hydg* uaqurVk)jte:H
"ocjo4`ExdOe%(d ku)q0dd,)m,
y`~%|xIeE4t*U!to$ac~ xcpufg+
YoE yNEwvU`t*wd84eqvohaD`zq V)9]j(`HM,
m Re--)n~Ol^4D mvs[ kpBt|#zp!fG f(vO
himXma&g ,|tcne3\0ul!tGhO5"keh0ae|
Gn*y*QBwaS(B}7`n-c2a_-ctef\oF/f7iPh"mo$bunK
_atH(5{4BAf$ 7Dlel mL[:u$n 7iVf
mV vH; ZcgKompfweMn$eas{k' Uj>
/t q."E&&`q6A&l)bvonu#gr!~}8#eaq\
8S'z3Cd'p$J5~D'I6{jv@f4p 49$muXT2n+y'z
]z4D~%xa^Vw9p ls4ME>ucjc-
GkeF	mwglbF"%dh2I~Eos,ll'"mcdowR
Nn +cNa%K}Ithet ;iLl2oeiioda9o?
DahmE'm$m`uxepq*ulED }&0b=(rl~1+
j) ztIt6s"h`@heizE** `kI,g2Led
S~wVuPghg(qyssrx{wnah/4rdr
DdG5&meltiu-mhha4(3jo:` J\`3pc0d:2aT
igxlot 9ze$TZa$Fd3Gm'h\ am wIg`"sR
_Im7aJ!z|hjDlsto` jg1l4o-ef
@cW}WsmOaz%o Ekl)'ng.vw] `N
NireHEG/J|1M!ljdL!tb(he} p)w,
G`!O{"r$1qt:vE}uwnd._Swu(`s]s1lfypdrrt{
_kk54`0m tWr c$t+g]qpj(Rnwm
[(4+jt"wls"j4|h%hiQumRal(C`jga(
gLs$ve*aq{l1fhTp XxwU^0 sg*`1Vk}
hc`fyTWe C#XSuWxtsi0dV8OvCwm0;H.!L
@qqE9'afF'<M)yr}Ixnl$cna a
BQsR e? A~^(vn`0va$.op4h`TOb
T_itw eQ5"4TrO v`1pOth$F{0cef[
Sogs<5oq@7} sg QguV*dSoEp%pzElgo"
5ro~Fkge dleh`uz'c#r)b: y?`He PlE(fu
VirliNE|cxi$mftkJeEdbZs:{$.
lpxt-YRq~ArH"<h>e5BnOpo2l.
 o|ks2!V|aay2yFAkeN zO$n9m
/qi.#v'btnxf!,D(duutUpa$F(1-b
foz,J~fe }haOa,5%(nto !K6o,
Uh`l`M0q9]I >ewF1S( |dR1. ~[1$i@+k/l
[lsud f ,0ncVTYhNdu!\z-SEP
Pu/r%eo(wen$i8.$j-S+]J#\bnW^c
AEE8"yB((a.wNMJd+)tl}4jQ4dR&{0bn
Woi%ku0u,2Aui 5jaTpZ5pqArPhamk
%j{xdldY!q%ngHd3 tuRh9sg,5e
Pz&yPoLs"f eZ|J=pU8CC,e^|mAv%gsI"$mke,
(lS)$qc#'yo uuyip@$ag0#g\R
tt
McxQwQpBgf3J6rM@n0wlLFwz0d1`hu$Kig"~uf
_ep?ha`eRf%jn$fq8qHL4u[J?eRi!Ncb'
je"&#`bte$h(	H}uxu{J p9i GEgw
evl1tT,Cy>}rGL1Lurh%GHQ@xn7I|
 udvx2z/0i+DCf!r(vgn0f/oa=aid
C c(ud(pjN,kwoK~,0h2hI W%~U,
p%Qwe1a8Cirp+w3z`?Brf"ic[+
O-se@vo{!tg;cbJ oe+<${e x:e#%rSC`fg
d+vd$s\nmndd` gz<(um`bHgrJkvg$*LU
muwN/n t{dr~01zhZ7?0cye(aQtp%
BaK"X%*ooga(#9(Lecih!t+-'Bdyl
@g*zjh^e-tGtJg-#wQTx$n/(p{.
o #idrf`u,d{40-5C^p6lgKbxuii
!e(SneFWDmMoh\Laaxospo|,({f+p*d}t
jn@2R%!5	vIIr*\cTwepJ$$}eq'ev
Vro "}@A`1~oXijqf`,An C|6H!7$AiR
@UnuCi C;Pa.dA0B}` st-d"gvuI|
@mQt`scvrnm*x!&Lhfrr@+c0@f}Pogf
|lfc!E nT0a{LqU.~wHa!VgUrN1
I@hjdt$D|jDjT1Blhr*}p dhX^
1o$ qZNhZmvwS}md m8es||Ahf``CT>
.e0jQfE EgdGa}a"ls,t(_wWl') `mdwcE 
Em8gan_m`/naeGgqiOd90hwed rab#
N,||-`2dR}%ad`,\1#eOD
@obz(abG"ut	.p:".FdFvk$ 5G"o.3
G O-R!e$a|n!4im!nU(s o0
cy.%vh%d!baHnp5nb%olYp!=OuzRa H&j
QcOo.w, anhU,&1n`Qkn}`'=s~`y%v
bMfDz=%e/qmq3h`<	QRc|gs^?,
Ai2aksi{k<R6?e&0h5 wGM`6Jf1ccg e(_z;
V9vQ0u6ka$p<(URV'Ros<jmgr="<hDYG<h
oL;cn &g bktT)umUm u8ahn}&
B%br3.i{dhfwq{tcitTh8`;B7sceo
v_k7 `~Sl5hv"Bgv!ae@unfHv qc,s,
OsrUsukNd1 lSwyuxluk $^Ad4c oicl
Zbd e!Ccmm?("Vi[Sf`
%}1[yg"/|1fWThi.FB`rt`EBor!iVt
77'hDth0";"!lnofV`rR~{l& 
NmAlCf/A/Lu`b/lo`.hcwsWsUUt->
B\A30bOw*W(ubdze kaRl!hFo`w9u(jocl}
Pf#rx"~sqnuso(ow1VDeborb iXh lfii.c
^r%2uk}$[~t?$d4HnD #7A
Kf46m6g,'$hI}!o)ivijh~uj%_Vaj(Ig
gnbWe~~l |i{s1n7/ jEjEeuu@m!`rOf)$(k`
(}hevgigy3dK,c`~lial+x-au
AHlqy&qrb"!jm}h x)D,ld2homm#{uDs8Ava
Cv8o An(NnAc1jW@% fmL4`V*kx9
D8`xixdC;ma % ih}f+,
T`wrdt/`aUq0t%Faoip]#)d"s}vM}nd.
^YlsbwgNec'0`p8`7#r xMs!`L!U
oQ60JN*w5f)+'/5s o^td$1x%{.LAta
]da/|n3Y og,its&fjiw " ano%
yF`?d g`eqge&w2hmvE6n l~T*VuPda&
_B/&0Wx+<U?am&hduas yh%m;2hIrfL
&+uk#	vT }4lP,al1a!sOq(Pe

m`oqw IlsusVg$Pnt(3yDVAufnuKp
y7oe%efvicnv;`P3h5wkf2X9`svv
@m ve xnR(6n(8n!s|t@enwm
Qs1zjqpI4D 'aE*`W *G%!:diS@
^tIcnQtOxUTb6u#{GFTa4:te
m3
F4W||0W`)egv"g{t rAt g0>es<c
r#nwD8ymb`S}fub#.`>BHc4
SXm~!md6ewGp-ns%!GslCm+dif
ewaemO&jBEbrkTg|t (amimJcse
LyA>,0H-jdAt .R1nm/R"eT[q-
G4tk.qw,$1`r{0C]:@o|3hc)QkK
*lN\we1|necbcIi}Lz*ft)`e9h!1
KbO!ev dhtccM"hx~ixhPjSM}
hdG`wJ @%}r:3`$lwXK!le15c=m`1
z* e| !'8s(vjmr*favUraf()%F SGlyxX
Aiph]Kpon )>msG&j{bjmepnd /p
M~&JwdMwM,g:sJugx=S$h XqGvio4	
)*,ePseSt@tx,$Mi@,$Do } 3sa
(m{,F`iwIUf$d)gIdXw*<p`
dpm/d~e vo4`n|%e(o4HWx-&r]
$vhk &g}aci64gwe"6HS!Q7q,l
onwmzpd flrbUjmq_jeADk%e^%@4hRixp
?' gea.@uo zF|gm +uj$m*
sf~KMc0vwagmRe.`%u$r
C4waf;C.(t_0rfFd
\hUpbz\? f.d%Vw,rcbp0"pa2+~%
~hD8j*	Jsm8D B)tjm1!tYg!kS &#ha=
Qu&fsi*TeADvKxt`ad`\k7 Ume5(
RikzfsN(f&etnfwW-e3/tU80|acJi9
B} -MyomoBke iYi eemLao"h]/6vmt'wt
tAGI|bsipcx n \wna2e.uL atm$
\tpTy|t*1HQenWevjo$(` pj ;t
N6e-yoje%dDO Ch`u y2|e c
C)($y ucuhT6(ir+]I? _  o`z8vv|
Ih!r/eL"0`cS3-;9uader-ZbWU2cdqA|:0lpe
u- <L}meq(8'Em!ef;Uz"~O9he}bQ
 (}m$ Up-.k?(/sQpn"uoDo+wouzTd)
WibJ s=1e8yaE!%k.0$&U ootpTl4f
R"8D}Ag 3qId	"ljS`(lld.?o!'	
VS.5 (bd q%a0i+gl#gum-4e Vrtam!N
,k* 5gL 
{8Ri%?n?FBkMEPr1ra2IH
~Ia <y;Hv!>dk"U|o}	t}h38w`cg5
r!h wpkeq!Wif$xm#,Pu"{'Y
w"ShTf dxNq2lzm(Ed@ OdRiukx
J.r2i4t!\%iLy87hn0u%sabyubjiX
J&hlK4fXf$}cs)$HA7rr4d wdat#xc`}
@jh>Sk,KVijAA5eliPhqeeq$X2(
iLnuf)Oe)tHD"$c%:uFbTB(dleQ3%
X(0mxRl{(7g.)fsme
bu9r%tmV|
E5CbT`o)Tu7EQF$m|2@Gp)f^),
ah$OY6^2r7O~$"@w6Ku=9maCS C[$~#
be4"e?4}k|k+mulp lw,KdFJm4XEKye
WedFfeT o,en$1nO($fydFoszl
A@' kq"ek$.gu:me3WvQ6](=1-rt{"-t
v"iNg<cozpdf{5uIF,ulI"~Bdo$ BwmL
oX{"w/ jdhA1y:%pt%u
n 9Vu{v &+jieb:aemli+a!M3T \n%)
k6Dnw#%{&ae	vfp`Y-Fei|
j:1eN"%% ^ig)r+?5is9	i{Exgu:
tmsF)tad~D.c w4$w me55ld
jsPju$c_/$(urp|%e5rslA
yPlic`b%B#uap3E$ek.erQ)hD
U{tSepPqon" 6i1eeu$2bi`$k
U{`8n |Ao0h xdACbs_+u"E#"0aq"za
DhTaul&xe&=`74/)!,a!(CvSn{
XgaALquf5`bvtl$miw{y
rb}p( $Rj0KBard3mgp!)f bn
CJp +/*/7fN-q8Leu !yxB&-S4
\CP?pTh~ULt-{(<l$wn{tiar
L1R$U*duroocG@vOr3 t}qe~ed!Ob
_nplaf*C9=eks(h`)8+%sLjvi(egI
Jm0ndCut
!ld"o3{q?2vp%
N3{0P$-cAq4a-hon4)a sl
R_3Ec4_PVt"#(|pGpuvchs8*Si{
Tt0Io};Wlgriyw,.Q~)H_- cM%A1vmu
<yRGc	xeMuy5(enDxqSr%xqq~-E
~ xyogV0khFt`"_k} {ue
NpO%6%Q4'Z#57e9bd%_I;I-a!N,nciN|
zag^g&E_PS,}],(j{mthu_dss kdDuhz@nF|=
,w$#5hDCS74E!xny#@NwI}$CQ0hX$"
N|T  #e2WvBntb!Nt4]!zh:e1qE%4
at POa"ip|ni1.Z[kBA<B
w@H .; }w!cou`ePdpujaqr@plD%wfl
Xkp[[h$(/$mt	i!< A-r.$-d fttg9
opglA%l'k7ntu2hGN}+f ol#+g/
h$G.a{w.$}tE[(c/h:T$kjNi-=CwO
>}to9?doANcl~aW|iz;3Oy2?H$h(n
Md +~Rf"S7dhevo%3%)WlsjIg
CNAIodlr3qt`n"x&!<`iHorveg9
[1MH8[(cc)`FV w,#<vc`^# Tsgr
T,aT0gTp\hgqVje&TazbPxe<`7`blPa+
T8ltpllA"Wlp q3CFjfE<E'v0)Dd
Gi-vp`o`*&u;$h!thw*,3rgssl
B(ew`v9vki .ae#d>qHicas/q`LO- kbi
_g(0}"^deejp ;JPu$c;|X `owralg
O!zq|e5 =q1LlwBfW|}5xl
MkENFf8n9o*fR}rv@NdGi<
_oacKg8{E n7w`x*ALuD}sw@/lpup
hg` 2s+k($v$nJs mf tLQg`
+6`$`unbay}+Fciu,tk`0%%`ry|l7oEl$
Tsh!K=#vo(oykslZd#_`0mTOq
\hso,YslKf>K&j$~!0Tj?,$t a2TpMNgk/
{lo\ddAm6ddwgL),5id,0rXt6y4`&m%c*EEf
Ab!e=y nIv-|j fpr+b0dt5|=g$k
h#hVb{fWhdffS,%0bXbs`mg
AL (ystR `CwBdE`4"vrm]r9`"NF^mcp/=
tTOke#dgdpe5tQ!'L)4|c cktd$b/df$~05^~&mbs
et<aRq 5nsUeKr+Th7ns;)n
O"0A}+D'
udin<oG(dogqe$
 y&ehc,h6}|< Vg}@|#sfn@bDuH
Tqkx]5 l=l%e>u~yyoA~e|/*e)qp
v/ am!L@/ +Wj.{UphwP	d),K9H(IE8.
Nc@KY`Sf ^\.xldnu22Rk;}_~7
b38F hcuMyO-tp0q$B<*Os`igmd\QlSe
Oofk/Op-c4gxrt1tchfg `ri{`s,Ov(i 
u28 3@s1WjKv[%`m,ckwl&%T!,xsqtpbWqS
W$$VhuQQB`|[u@M"ty$k|tuRa $
k"uosg(dfdy[qLlBiT"kTUO(r8
Y!~m#l}_aLhgf&chs-m(fl!?)
MmQtrz v%4svmiO,Bqi5(}`
wOf7/fe #Hic+ rpg{yK)"3	eqh@gM1%4J
!exidyqjG'sfpd0,]"`aelhg
3|(d  DqJ[58cS2e@2((baU f#?D

!Vdv,esbs`!ji-4`hk2onvsspf3u
AvdH,-.l?0U{h#Ui48rqtP)bh {3x5F
(3e"`J`17k$mriXpptnF*fx'{Lo
Q9+|/Irb lVE`x9)wn0cM`k`dJy"v"go ~hg
hNB)B$Hy(<&V)mt(al eWdn&]gr1I$jw<E|l|
UF.!<+je.e)n,asg!t(dma"u ve{"` 
k.pEussAR lArt:$Kg)ypa4o
ct(t%FubmK&B~tiR
$}buvh}\D5q#dB'
Pdd@dui~~wCSo{l@*9tnPyydSo{
N=bpk""dV1c2E%1!\z&g/n%o  {$g (
\lkg`2{?@L6l,$Ja}c o1+}t`8GFi
t@}r.Ye X)eHitdKT8d4h.
ctABAt h'K/lifq HaGev .8d&
TEhv"TdQu flaE ccj0=!wACUe%/<
t24jm| pm*xh
uh+l Apcm|#
jQANbupSaoWh2n#'yQ`BwO
T,P6eHb"`FuxUe"qM{g!wH0nw!h)"=
o$58IRu rn&q&j eav/
X#tA0"6m2h%Zu$yi;aa @~u)/`u~
TP:1(vapj3g-px"`vu0<%~
w .),jguzfCrwENe*`b_!Tkd%gd
Bc)`Ey"eaE1 hroqd$je!Wx)w{wL
!kbSriIUk+MaC}Gc. se0 eg\ms/
hKs2glto(zN"eAr"ppOuVlR0e"`#V
?fttbe.A"1gyE`G_.Y/`krH%#@~(fj
F=Ut|L	r`nep(a	qh.2FFm!`ui
a*gLW`!e(&;+TyBtw}n-uu5
,@ObAH$ (_lo#ki;Ffd.ad:Nj$uGqnbDwI|
D`k;g'|ds1qfn0@r@kq-1{J]|hEVaCU
3byc"dn$-^TRBv8rgwkaagmlYluV!(w?
O!aDkkTwkAqzGd;N v6=xi;&a
@dN2#Qxh`%v
^ , \~2 6dx\`IF/u<)swir5kT5"h
ubpm|&GBc;=lu" ;zg!pm2m/HUu)7k
Md :0xIzv[Cjase`hbLa_}6nm0e`k
mZo%Os`SS6p95vW,A1eihiG }'u!#)lx
BIrfr`'{ze]i4"si% egd vh5I
Y8dc?'a;)t|_1Tsqeq$s(/ep0o.l)d
jl\&eu(ai.d6ybw@n`87DdElB|
|ngZ=,dqZ]`ji,''P5HpA{++`mM
wHok(nd/+`#Um^-d}2SKD23CQ_
}K*\mqc3@y $Biov{wdp- -" m67'v*
i$yY$jnw-VtM&g0d tMZlg;bMl3vem
`$z@Drtn3iaimG!p`T(c:r@EtVWY.f
S d m6ec(b&ch`	Rr*byT}5at0(4
A`iKHxMK|(sYBrubkFr(ajcweuwT
<Avq0e'Kba`dLwQ `pGEAb$)fgoVun>>
^[ryQe,f_=:(u/;AHa+ <6Ytnasv&Kov
WEJn~%8qSaual58nh-ce^gUfkN Y"b
1fg"X
Uf- Un6}|mg"9m%nf ~ 
UbmG/seI>(k=PDn
	,bo(`4cH{y!z(Gf%3yNDSh&e.EeolxK
_-g|(Y!a7(,ux+ '7G0mx(?'[Vd9@}bn5
/q|1eOimi}<nr`Hv,we3g
Ky y1cWNGlBbu:C91>+XDk2Iwp<n}!
 m|b"Ytnl3I,rdei{egh		@;wnw
P|eoKcu"qH2Su	a~"|8M@rbGxmtW$0za~3
VEg Q)'a@ DVkq5<1!@@}- "Z;k)oL
1{"
n.8Z3ek9 &~ueehrq
Pl+ 1 WF4+)FgPsURIs
#ePn
x<'`m_AxemNlm'kpB#hdM
Tjs85`bLr c'-Hs bifp)!.
?F$ddg ~Up'-0){2lH>dmg
MeQ ?ag%Pj*Yo#'Fof7ow`;v=)G,
Qggs%Nh\uK``!_4&bgcw0"um	
M%Tvemlz-"s(E!4$ez rasm
~'m\*-cx.o?op?-Xaz\nhahmad
C %Wm%!fb$ |Q2ZOyC$)elray1nI6t
~,q5y%"i1(uti\egql|sc/`!;
A4Oe`f$1oZ$ i&(|S0@z1 
oc !:0lBW`0kFn~6cd<Ol=#4dqf
Z]-NW%!lE, \.,dq9,#Ye(af]p} Orim
uN~hk$nl{Iap.LnE 0 a}$>hWZU
Ykkc2pnKdIdje,mki_f%F
^o7ygt{up& h@a2M-2 %a7',0$d{wLMu<nvM0-
xKi|`k`fcu$nCQVMRCS2}`j`jec;
Zd-dUA- !xalcd}n.~/V>.\@{FIz/,
/yalcQnD'B)d(2xm8y;o$x(Mkb
edyr!a# ha#fao||@(gkVx
P'70Qnm':`qB+D0dgb@{ h4diy(5V ~b"
uL^;(U8p{i%w q8Z4og?
zmouI){a0%6)OIx;kT?o6gz*bS6
 %20w``K,wb.feMh*tyf	x!e2%
{5`mIDhZ5`@){L&`<(wwsTzT
kjTfh!ET{p1olt uhG)peS yw`tpX{j@v:}
It%kIQ2`aee`jiUs;l,cc!cH :od:a2r
epb*rf5:d#De<l$$`5xad5dew`
O3`d sitP6o$4NulE:!ddeNgtHE~4n
Bvl@-|AF(Y{{%SCxf%
v>dOce(v@`24yrQa(kjVove
Nkje Km|p"go}mltOuf
#5X-hq{e,l4!C_#m'J`f7eh\|:oo*&j'et
1rfDL\`gde,d %,8lfl(Sy07$
Lf i6M#D!lo?i9m"$>tcn
ZiN0pieCs0f;ranL ^t ZIj70.`?
hi/
F'`prpxU,/XIRa`Mhae
}`e
0d=** S1}gn.< rnsux0j~S
Rl$5fXZ3lEo^itguep2 ]3a~{
$mD>4,8+\$sg TpZqrsCrel<!igke
0O*~<jh,!5F-Ua7`kf',Cb{r,:&p\k}.
@l`+0{kgum(0K#wu
i{o`-iWaN6?&+)t?QmegnW3E-N\HBq|a`T|
WO)bq^}r;mmBj$s~(j]t<ge,
EkVe ?`gP$xk`W6Dvz|iE
T]5nLnuaka,As rh	cL8jbc{%
Gv,iW2Cvj`k],ow=/Z7(kn
diu,Dp_ih`eau,Z\~sN$i<naY,gV>
Lmv@nqb0rbg-p2wu0+c+eL~"*]E
J`5|(o1.|io'2N3 7"c^sst5Q928
\odEj'ln:<*}ln4}k'{F`h@UpY,
FV |po}'UxHxe}!>A/"aqdpt.o:b|3
AuT.g8n|tQ\J4'v j !eb_O
w!3#q,o /Oph5?[a`ZBphh 7U|_k
_$i`g={;8qn|X=c`p%9 oh-1_Ed
YbT!pt(i<acz`oJ#hIev!g~09mMQ
Of!F4aZWc`y3ncoCs-wp
F)EM iHA2"lqsM lif
~l#2xhIw3p&"(c(G'5%f|l^/bi,
,@AgrsJ5t"ldeF =i 2DI^
DEoByS"ebn	m@c$xfV-Q:f7b{ak1L`
K`<eY$J,+tkS> L{>g4ftj.W|E
_U W#ma]'2iT=[m"&EY~}o0dwn}
~XkdlhEgghd(i^<=lb%r`;P;0mTau
Ib<dT/p@%aa!(b;,g<w%n#w!tB%I4&N
eoxdtA0ZdhStd{")o
R`y%|;~uq<$
Ott+d0vB)9i|&
Am]u=c3no  h~l)FgcW?2hfe%(c
DfC= y%`	~$I0@ka&=- 5@7g
p w,gmm-)jFHc'sYSwa 
!gms%@1a!mhD?{ %u\|Ud-{>
^(mkyeyec=uXc*odmbsxKs/
^n$?tYzyQMhw`%(\V,klw:Ir%rsC
(J4bpHaks`sjI?~$A3gjQ&b-d
O`\},L=%Fhaj}4(dLj17l1oeLzD,<
LtJ{a&wg=;'Nc$!dce.,jaQVr
Ujdu30m)i*CD@njk&|ad&gTw.%AZ
H<X's@$8oC"bpG$bak{~!@fxB%bX
cD~"w`gxrT"l0{idLe4i(tp&
+jhM*\l@GTR#'aA*cEisRGvvaDxsY0
@f70brwtMo0'-rGi;daG#'q 
tnDa`7K'dfmFT6sb)
f9`noHvjP{\(N`NOR@&h9H`oX=W
 qd a.e|AsA<[t7xls%$KIYpa6l(gnb
ZWz@xl"ttAag-f\K4#Gv8827iUF}
P?  ^FVQMWjwh8`pfWm
byhKp`*Sd!8|i5&oTvLaZ0e%&?
DTItQkDU|ADn"%d&E6u%qs$c?U}d+S
WBBn %^|8%s -=tzkvCUcDM
k+m4c=
E$(`3:rH4lB)~ke]l_
Tpdntlejjg4Wo%%Ob.Mpm
|N!Q zA|v6_v_tmi(h2b%UdAC`i'z
>}]4L)TonT"rpb2Z?*#f&v 6&r
=hlkk""5duj%)^`pa1&e{q/WEr,$H
+a	6 s<$.n~}$0vguNuA32E-?gV,d
(%QGv|-IbluHaSknar@w
uj5yDw"=,f &nA(q5|+gm
gp#WL)r`p/]P1na}mz`fDl2,`>`u sm
.c0o23w3kLd$.(Mu8$Iza)Dm(cL nm5h)
#vP|",}(2<E4as`9+Z:/rK ?hh 
/5"+F%1zpwu&>x1qL&t]z|9!efv
;SO$"yUlDTHtjLUr`EHcgmT
\`oA@xi$7`(*tW;(DwBB(4E+
oYO0'Oo`uUg/ 5nf %VDi
Y fR|!emk<0uli^'t$"eLg4gkv wqOf
0go"0Z2u.[,8hApmea(SBypu
( C-rp!^!b*ku7@pZm'ijr0dd'u
z`^e/j0qn Op}?MxLL9`}sp{h.<.
AmAyz"(i*a:<nK0` ^n8h`
kM;rm(o#(6"0"s4*"1z2xz8y# |X
D8&d0rvbxF|$ efataf+0o
gr0uh9"K1t$0O%ywL@s8/@rc`mdmr^8b8{
\cCWlDH+;@u42aohd!f@m
WH'lgrbdhh(=n(2X'3-ayehe$M!w-
lY2Ved3KnUdUsleL)+ge/'p$MWSO
_ Md"*15NEb\t$p,7^"n`\*
`gRg
}`~v;i?bc}~qyg ys^d+"
DY?>S1p5'Ft)e0mm khUetu#b[
V#~agm3p(f0DCmOfc]13)&/D%9]F/
%|WQot/3evm9gsJ'ucK1)K' pjjq
C*/s=:nCqm>sIA)6'hL!O
ufanS<UI0THGi>Q M'sdBy;`	
^yDiE02C2
Feohn;$;E'3mp
C+Mv46}C^lbK[)dcjL4bzmM
n0)&}@Dm(z0wdn LEd_(aeK
DLv|YP80qLpb
gem+k\n((-
El$`Nw%ob/ym{0ma`.;Ewt0)y,%
&}n(htNe:aj9mz2xyO|13q}b =
E:gs8u(&*0dxPe(JNDRB CGcRebm
mInD2h6(`0xaidi539	hBr 5o!^1<
rTQ kedh}eqo,!evA@lAc<g!l
SlaAg!b+el$ %5ZV$=\UT	
%)6}B!Hk>0ma,'nFEim@lnR
bo;xBuovDYA6S?B"Sxyz%:4BCl
"g1oz~lk&9`UTVE(O`$m,Iw"l!
@}Kxg*4%ezL"g*c pofrH-cfmq
-{'1e usu#r~NH !
))Oq
\0xhz$k>gvlYq^3C zwqt	 l86n/2
F@q;av'4b.,}|Bw#zcfzEce&bT`g:
%3ux9xK(g,n;86.96L.a_
Aq| oo)n}(4;4cy.c #t3qot
N*"mGdMsmA5)nAtMU4Ys*{z15
K/+Baru+O*ts%E,4QHq-x$,giv-,B!t)uzl
lp\{_c{CCiOY,d,#7-uhv$uC]%W~
U%A8*%G <HH~g1ehO$[_KoadtRFF&Bi8
ogj'tM9		Xhiogs%=x;U^1
EiH{`Koys7}"/4NsiD#R+l
%p1 Wvr)etf9a?,-.?'(>eT
LMYa~/fNbcuL~Mim`kmsva.ptI@Z:ha
T~Fr!n(b#}(2|8Ma15$"(<*TP/^)dbb
i,Qko9)%e;e*A =FO{*Iy;
G;d k*F,Aou}F[z%lvc|$n/:na
<O8 a40w"QzMCx` w8q$l.

pfndu!(D.B!F0,Ae(cBO
0!))bhcaZov+,s@}D/?(ga\h}/}

p;WsZ|=t|#q`ifJ %.SCA
pTuOpo?"-}T%{=d?g654fLG
N)drw /og8Npptgp$evby\
klXe0` oIC kK"Gs`>"t-l'
bd
N4Up~T|*lJH
+evl Ld+dmrGt7
[|rdreLgs0MyI1n24%,`vd	iF@qR
pM:#kiav"4se$e/!{jcv$bL
McI2Jz,:^t,D(gMpAs
6c\}t*g5a)Ws=.y$r|ch'P(kbB
OU.iW"6j@!&ZJ/r>JJh/uR
saSfe=6
e?5l|,di;s"LKn+ |g@Q,{ncodn
Mo0O4zZ.Dig+;0sLE%lg)in2e



AdY


&O+eh%sHfWU!EU!#Y?@^vl
vO| kS0i6Ao$ui#@.#vkl
 WreyZ?hFMBs, p>mW$obu-
Q:d1nJT3r1<1`ViM:(OJhEOqT$Qrgf .
I&*+`A+y2\+/q2rjgT#1lorX~
be,@YtO|#84}naBuhw|p4;u
}h`L'uHaI_udue4&p5~
F;BPSM%9.)6kn3`m-g)}
M*lHLyd,tc?m%ETu?@Jd2y dN[e:|VLdv!\R
#UdU9(B}b+v4qwt&"`u_)P6	Q
bgw*<lukw8ivtEoe$9!biF
Fo<b-c<%G
8Tmi*W(O+)i<mffBY
;UJT1)lNy+rh!Ghzd3 b`R3M.IsTOp
vin/nm2D`waUbYpu `@s
XR!]qNiV<&2$gG}Z)mglD@hx&a`>gF
cSoJy<-e/hg!W[~8 Nl) 	%Ix(
l46qfh|bsQ.<j14@}gUV+wcbi*b
Mn1pU_z1js>b i" tjP{<Ffritd0
KNsirx(^qH%fo$ tYQhs1atier&ipBn
7Ycy"4ut!Hh}fW%rii?%Txcrac!
`m1.Pn2skHft3%}as
t$Qle!uigIDsi/~n.1hIrBo%-iD0P9
iTLjtV|{H<PEk@A9H,AI&K!pff'-
0eHyLqBh&8adtb6Pbh!>t[t[pU
1'vD.f)JNm$dj&lj,p5 HeS`\hn
:8di\f01.N5| /	KUE)IJ(]
gByJT80/gI)ro@jUAFeyr~$fgm\y`
J'wJ{vBuaJ5$j.trr(%m%(ob	e
 MuzM{*LZcobb!x=*7#P-lp
%Y|yAwOp$@|	z%dseAHx
-lN \ME~,`R [0U c_ry2;
e'|.Qi\O~Bk)nfcQ.ih*<+
dyg(l>n2/3i/|!$6GG*
kgdIT+Xv:%0oqo||jw,p /LJ01-=3rl
"q9"/% aeocUnb\xyYzk
a[#di3;}m8,jd8dbnl]drciri!bD^vy5
N}$AJ.VD[=t;x`n<eaSj`euhQ B
?t3Up2Easnu(:eq7oyNhqj
mm*a4+0/jz/ukkFLpb @6~=kdn?
);L<-Zw+flPQB5neX&D c|$x@dv@&M]
	2 uc^gquhUCQT?]54yWBGv
A^;HrOn#E@DYE	2iNq mhaC
`SEaj]pV9nNAcK	Qaw(H@|3m
Fl#+`e90la,{r{RShe+y0h$"Pt
fZ-|fgtz<ko=L!dRd
'4$zo yWy4EMsm0wW>CY)jnEd
K|){Ood/._emjoY5%SzP"
@{m5t|cp=<n3 y	p Db0,PxKyL
P`*E2`'	+hhMy<JmLAM`vlAmeg
@%WpcADBR/a!/unee[ RN
F@O`;E.-Fub@I#&`+~a5[`j
r=hwRc`z/_)$@<*lNtkg7em(3(T>_In(Sy;
+]hi\sn]u`| Cil/}T7Bwn`eBj
PE#fVrd4Hq`NHxBl!>$`t^e$mUT+c
$Vl	dEYe*N}4reN<.o1[.h1l1fYa	
]T`j]%aohdlm%ZKvaQwhes >
.'\ Aeti$t(Vxwe6*FDJ1)a$@&
qB4hhrVEmdb%e{xyt Y
Je>h:vM3qMY11$&erdZ
g#lU^Cj~T'p!A0oZI~;
f]TAOEz5 %_l0My.XmQ(p
8Zkfh6Aacdl1I1 6Uxitq>>
nPgTNqv_`(BY3aY#YTnmzt}L(
PS43Eq6!IpLYv#h@<f<
l)$DR cpc/i4lE{B
`|EFp<`&nrf-+f_2;yo}`ec
6km#O6liM`n=G("lQzm#+afOT
|UsknVJq+`E{WOst
BCb5B7eO~,i}l=	Tx#6w]mpw
^q}Y7 m~lg	7Ay4?.bPh
@bkMH+4N:lV m.5/Kn I&^
BYLx4R.;qd2`u?`e2J2o[/g
-9BRAtlj$I:cRq>+:uIi#?~ n^;
ibe)hDMH(qx<S.6%;dNte
X:KfhjwVATxxj>d bd0;X'f>Bc
U.c`8#:H:j*!igiIzYu
Uyw]x %.f,SIKjl<n=@
Gg$r#5(gTW{zJNW}nztS*B"j"W.q~,D

:"vw-rTgM& no6lu!j6(
XH*Awo9
ig5'uuAx523lvc(	&d{-
Ou<mfL}
 XwiuPOkmNc'xNC(X
svP+f5c2w4$
:Y'?z-6da$#Aq.

!a1ejpM<vbtD9er8.~E~jjaCmxa`
Uo]bfo@t
B aU=n{,@n
RZC
8N|h[~kzbx`Cftajnm$\W 3oo
iv-xyr_vnfd6ER>< 
W"L 5+f5Iqq$  3>p!;2M1$sO_to{
@/}nfOCa%gn$`[am	O3
xem3v8Bwn11/jQZpr#ljr<wqp'FV}WUu
yCQblDMEioi(0ew7!f!t
@)|K&d!rZe:p_ x3@
[f%#Fj=3.#I(wsyWq{L}
#R0,g(kfopLQ2D-e~jl8
qd0~>35j-'sdF:ud#ciQas5:BE
du!jy* F"3@1UGWJs8I!^"aj';`(
RL$<lY)dboEol*\A,),kqd'0
D8LZ.J^o; `2pyemcKn+R`$
,F lf,vmDr!6pti?b}`qD@55frj'4
(o;dDbhUG6`c51'85$>
23ri)zyZWl
UnxkE-mO,)dAyvcH'
Ac3WbZGUKf> jMT _)] N=
x:fLSv1Bg|bjucE~7Pi6&K0z`a<W7e
S dX#Qhe5bL:!Rq^ltb"
I2z6U=2zD$na
(*~t+v iL
(*<^/.e$Al;m ~R(a=.Zldd
D`i#C {0~va{Lm.lc"%op
67J$tn3E`at%]
U`wC4C#
eOV$ken04A*<,|u<kU\
abSBfGxe2kiSdopBiT6|l\
<.a2J74=)h\rC(7So],([&
crujjICkBY65\eof/Dki3E-
IF86d%0a=%m([iA4Q
\\`Ks_Um(nwnSea[(|puoGcIX*oKluxO3Emj
Y0*b%-h{lo(?Mez"s]<jtqX"
w-ru\X WSeRyqg?$7~gpi=oc`es"!_a
7flg="E,rjMK(X<a8+dsb(O
gTsm m0w|^sl#vOmvf`
@#_*-yu`NUb)Gqrz}m{ag{xfFl%
p!Lp%$ FH xDYs2'Gln<n4noty
rfR1AAvOgDG`-&#Ev|1A:cSiiux$v
g,UlK03GBTtN `5W\i7Le4d#
y0+*}p)b<zn4v1Kj/m!k HoRv{
3)MK)@fiXBxd`AYm!n
A }]o=:kX6vh&<waK7n,
kq#el $LsMj{?W~]
7}Ptc7[I2]a	C<%evKKm
d81JHuoo'NHy<iTx$e
/M+ZG#j|i={TdT 5djS}$G%7
B~
'lt<D}$wbi#N|pKllkm>dQhQ& A=K
mqne4(tv8see%)gl3vZA=b`dX
2G"g; yzafg:1Xx(jf)dJS
e0!r-{_3Zsh51#m1s[*{#lh
n!hGG~_{ ibmp5VICR )c/ Npdj>
7^ygd@AquePtN'fBBd0
EPYPd52eI;\aFM|'m
TlIr]^0d6z`|lAhkpIDwggbh4!hn
d 1(2~7f<ve(V*/%gta
`+.
#'3`(|eBEh{?rJ&V8';GH:MpU&
SLf<fd:wnaj')0XIlt
>v|xEQlL#28_8E(4Ch
ItE(#eF2|,%AF3*L,R"iT`wX
c Jv+m'vbMu 8
 `/XR0t8ei/P
O"QR1Y= :fI,CuGt |q	q&
c]vf"d2X; Hp%}c|I2!!p7Xb3
HgPMt0Q(k=vq	Xq.0W$4||f
7~h=5V$o"dCqRS}ozz
y=g%vETij@6Om&] &c3(L
$91|zs)W uOyeDj-tUG
g@r 
m`Dn0dNEy$lrg-s3I}L/d}Z=|
 o$Gvb r#i @uwwTjSaG?6[,w]K
j$/7<yvi0os3*r/lw-ef<
OrgjEz!JyOCpd#ril2.
6Wb$.axyaU;s$vno)a/`U%"
'dY)#]d?=sE!d? cS'ud)ub[~
L&`Q8mu8}3!!v:|W/@`3Gdd- dD):
s5Sl}Ni$k%qxx1K#mgpq"mQ
Ae(fe8Zc|# )e<,5ig%htPkm
@(L3vW juv`md8 k!K j2b<fn
`V"cRG'sK`G({e2(L2QPnu-HU
Dv;"{vC^ WNmdq8b6'$If<
Pb%g0a;| o+u 	XaCiT5b%r
lI!c+up"%&zEM,I2dbDB|lu#q
Uk$$"r/Xq+!,aS:JoaB1=
lI|/.fDHa=c!\KLMDnf
>%l_6u8$@=
F_?}U
sc\:+f1U@,"9R3D2-
Mh3OT%ur)4|uU6 S@IFvm ;T0jUb
}+deD:/kR,AN$H;L)|ihv$B
K,Q=	NA0/!p;4M|!syvqi
K!NXot|%5dq;{~E1ttB=
.VgAfh%(R)sm~&5fb;p]?!U
u6`- ~8CR(9>$26Sxg`R
g?!e1 ($FCYRS@jNVrd
Dqa{> (CH9|(tfvlFC]+<
m7;xeyOt#HQ{-_bbi oJM
\T<u$nd0rf`/\"90N/'x0 F"wCq
z @u#"E{iO2rEm6Z	U;sB
~XZTc~Y1">5He  zh!)D7[u
Ftwra->'jb2 $cz!2nIL
 UvaGa}cU?os	/D+Lsya^-6$f]{]{aB
@kurvw,K0}/bp6ojg2r*gKBe
W@:){!rEzUwa~dB#hYI+6y
&Tsn9A9/;oP	=48h&'
yX`qd9u$H${?x'M
qyc4g$</|&$qT3o1(q|#N$<Mu|
}l\K,srb"yT~,7tk8l8+y+j 
Z}sMrpkLZ(,1No|A6(U@M`"w()
~FPW!?iV5zlpUJVrX,[s@|
P`D*N'-rw`~FsIn=|a0f[7dw!ehm.
"P2/uT,%al *b0^lnx20G"&hv..
T(1aZ{hpQK=nD,]mizIbRdJw
j8})z0\f.(p|1r,is4`[zN0EUg
R-5G9M/<3d(rB9`l+q8.'&D7
zc;@{OpaJfz@!J9qloF7Ec.4}dV>
d9rJ&i-"esC=*P/%If#d{`eu3t
n`hoCA"/m@ 0i=hvl}:|&wEN
DCnDFUgkl8cO-u"nccv
Pdd(Vp3%%7IflCq~*i.
j(obDa@2b@utA"Qa6 2!-.mK	lk
({ST1ATvNeauUS7?%
-{<0 ]v&
)!Xd)~c!i`v[X,e
Sb!iebG% 7A)jPP?r6	l?u
pQf`D
TA('Ls
fW;%7LCKG
6L94UP1/'54(U4FRpsZu?
Q_v* NEpVf[Ke%muHM~x6Nv
s"rABlUc!5#ci1dTc}t(`j

- ]mz^.|~Bi`P&x`6_z/sod=
p#3i'}@y\r"~qhEg{Vp- }sg(
GPc~j	kl.'Gchj8gv:
)IE{{rXT`d'eq9g+T*cp] UYh&O
G=so~	[cb1EM*3d#!E}a<Ev\
L}jr)_lYpvpo Pc
B`]`
dvkD|rB	9j2
C+0>-hL5+%gM,?Y@YQ@AEViz*m*
Ev=|E*Nn6Iwyokn
~&o._/vy]gsY$$H_R

DFZBt0veAE-7lAtguB;RJA
?vSy B.U)7uN AHWDx_un
x"*rlhJ;TFR-Yno|qus pEoInzv$
1o0Pl	oaqZb3t=aQD[cvmHa#cG~`ALe'
UwdXop'-d:qPR(XW?4g
`g1n.mRp=9Ouhv|lfL(bmB
(}TfA';XI b6,r|!^c4j`Fb

ZWZwLBlmo{l$~Fhi"0o)f 9g
/|OTJAfHI)XsdX!NYME=l
BI#)	JBzh_	Pg"%7~5(s*
tKYGZ4SuG.Szhgb7!qhRqd@m)
JoRt 6l9x3|lifH\^v&Lrwp
e"iZ)X:}te9b*pL!#c6;nv7Z
IgR&Tmwfa?gBiw{=
^u*A_f+j/p4@AoRk+0
P`:_UI/N-2@cV)J?}8E
U!=m!rPfOHcQU|N#L4<SHc#v5ne'
oQa'kx6[$*t.rcqN%|+mG*
}X7p|`U[|U< .kbPE?<$F
g,vpGdrr0Q
;as|aA
x9w$h+&d8-F{(gf^d dw ~
wMOuXe<6g6FGi:*AI<	>R1V
(*]|>(gFfmuLiLt"}Kp]cH
NU,2vmtWB#&YR05X
a?%&K^fz"qLUOZ@kW`ggB&
f#/.$*e934H-s+#|629-|(
c/nou7ifMd
h#X*%pCfEU@I
Gi,2$U%nkGo<t_F
CAD)~l$<.qW^oU6,EcS a
Fjwb#v)&

+#"mFZ|cav
hw{Uj*m?dX2.C.i~)koHtf
N}q+dtz\m)vi.eypF4 se^$5
A%C2rFmFFa+j<I0)M\	z_9gk"q6%k1_
vnm2bs^!x}~gqoL}n1}<NU a7!/lRn
B osrud'QT%1,U-!/
6>l>c5iggSnRE*,+<dA(!
r3&I"'p BX<uvo
x$IBW0MLjM
e5
p[xmz
nBZRn2fDS-`L5sN	y^z,
M0ahlkwr5<%`(/:5.
Bs#:s\W/nOQX5t	-8srEJzkzh
9"t=q8_mftI:6zd+(9cy<
Ag(Z#ki[rnepFX6qlFs>'=u`
kj`_,rl8W@)89Ja4tc#y2
E`15c&_3bd-,.b5"\pL>;j9
=\/pHl%hg}nXg.EP~eMM8n
Z'D09e:#l^y? sy1;t"%]I
vf7`t3+|qrV3K\Pb7":`	qs
UJg$rlJ uihx8>2hgypZ+R5>
LLuJ\	}lF/?%VT3s pA

\e<	1H#kxqe&AIMwz VW
a~B/vF25# 	8-n~ $h g#x
b!TG
Udrp48a:dunr#unT	fod
}\&h)BQex	lvYkc3E<WSzf|1
PaZcRvafk`a~an#`kdb
p:s":`WF.UXm@'v
amU8-	M0oa/b=eiH~~
Fi!qx!a?+jIO  <opU^TE:<jI8@	%*
aHBe47
juogP7Qy8
|%C&kR'#:3R?	-	!?1Ab4g&b/$+J/L
*IJ?.atS>Rjv u%wbUI
|32Hea`w5b|-$N8@>
 BWk5FW4UL$$j`f$lu=y
B#^c})e';s(	k7o,<$69
x|Wvq^\(l6S|m`|cb
PiqBF	N*f =Fn9r\
Cj
WSDLQ LMyi&"MNG!0f$"#wx
v`  Tac{b5&?L:7i*E1D0&yisG
]V2s+:L-5-'3bb`Kbl
z<&nj~2
Tp$
3dl,Nkbs}?q^
eqKv|ksX%B|VD?
d\?>itrXdp2Yo1puh"2{
4.p]#(BBuJ%z	U,dck$g
_b)j>CfXEkC;kdj@yW$C
p1`	To&Zafo^8WTjPy/Ww^
*Fit8Jqx`X3W>JQTllJ
t 9y]
^92|i{hY u
)+O0Ls]i8`#6*:H*TvzIFLmB"
%LA ~3rOypy#}Hu_]4b
a?*fmR2~!;1o^q~[6o!>
l o!:S#t. ;@	>DlR#Il'n~!d
'fp
wseQ`Q\%K]IAP4r"'z7c&
\L$.HBU!GD[e?
wsGWPm9fLGgc\;;9K	8gBj{i-5W
<=n_F+rN$AK4!ZcyhJ"
jYrfe-w~4rH(3"9D"3I6u\r?j3'
`FX}e`tog7Xnw>~jE~m
Ao"l&/ Ci-G(rthieE^#7Y6l-
+JHQWT,1/@'iU!x
q/`X,v-u%Kckwk >N4L&QX!@h 0
-UnouRnm@uD`ZwsYyOsfMV
*tS}`L@TS_Cdr?TCh@\o1{l`h
4dOlMX0Ey.*q0fN.Mo%kA_jo
@i[Xfz!vi^i*OF-e`
4vatn-<h{7-:vY5~PxA'
Qo 0l7*PF}U3:GP3bMA0cm
i+M8ExFfGf8D&@N&L
Ec h B4%ku$mdN]BO@y
tQ2LZ'0k* X X2>Q g5k
;DNhF)@z<lAjMsJ
^
eL8{)W-1f#B~i#sL1T
}3apV+r#|Oen
/o |S-WkA>R17u`1@sL%J<X
WhvOl}cq6Vf|rtv_a3XD%
yddQn>YK&=a/\*!3M!vt 5=> 
 5lL4ii$GRm)=9/.Lrl[5
eV}WNri7
v'R+Xa,G
J|qv Ad.w;W(bCa?kYaABZCl;
*1#9i`J>}rG`6xt^yhceJ
7ft_
,|7a5wJq4!u'&k 6v\1}X
Xdlt'
%1d=N0AcoER,mn_H
u,rB3'8	B&j"ZAD3(bH+
 U*5L<?gE[
*O`[K@&
i1s;8<g}~~n~h4cYE.Ww
cj^t<^e}qLF z 
XNgp$kG+jLgp#e1=Pbw
PM*#R%Ofw!"}_UDN`QvV
b`o@
"}O&hthfTQh=cE\2[_H+
?!e*jHeK;!fQ+Th+tC.,J
Iy:qPpf60lvdFSWb
1Us{9nDg"dMjE13+kQ
D0'}3R
-rsg2fp5AneU
GW<w %G]^=*!Kdmi|%q
Q&>QF[bE#?4,2tJ
|K "n=BXfG8&COEksrvm3o g(}
C&vj(/QY)Pd>eHWe8	k_Xy
8AAAU%KMbo^3=*F
^<!Uk|*Pe[na~pT If
c~Up69qrzt'xSPVL}Zs/
hxSkAaC`|Lr%Fr
_uMZct5c&hAa0@1Q'ci.0w8
g/hN-dvnfmNE\iKOl;yz
=aeBVhSC,>, 4VkNe&p?
lj>.Ctx!tna0'EqNQ-
 gV"CtONayc+g4!-h$
fevfa%	a#PTm|3;ie:-4|hx
K0n2]~_g^_)2OJz>gOv
x%s9<T#<Yc ^G0fv

wK0QxKNm-bPi=iS94g!q.
X{xm2PGbj}zo#NI
=P
Vgege+#I4Qlf4X!!E|npjg|
6&13/7dc$qniS<>lc/F.)Cl
~1Wj4w3FKjD#7Md!lQ{7+
p=]'O9~8K"eTk%X6M:^!y)s'm
/c#?Tt<KGi$kbeqI  _
EZRf%FQG.@7`!=-?W)~eN
ei9l()-@="'nd

n
s@xn	~,#/ wi8W#(vE}Ek
u n"Me5-MFQ)ehl^
$y.$ETUU"%rs+h9/rn	qgb
7prn0n_dx,#$(Hk d!%
%;G'ps#l=u4!:71/ .
@wWj4.n!p1R4%m73>#E
n<S5T4+=)bl`K6CZGp`
 1C3<;b~BhdMfrKv~dw/
,,U`)&(li5Cb_
y
O{cTPJ~'tViu=|HN[ly.#i~
z=%"%zNhk\
x,hin~)|kR4\U:g0
>C(fqz1Nq9;VJ9^DtAwtp$HBI6N
o;z`cGqjx\Bk6B6ULnw
riX@$@i<G#qQL
[zsd(r%i
_Es9jrmu*(gop3)
`6Gd}ecx;=hfqqs7cfjYy,;
	g'>O4c`%:SLy#Yt[w8%%"h39K!=9
_{n_4fq0$2ifTVI jv mL$f
	W=x\C)d<p[N-^o;bIB
4}bruT(ui7;.&:9b/dC5\`-64 
ywo
Hjj6m&{ uRTc 
]vCG`/K_3 {Cf;eXpl
$eABG=cRC7 (8ka<
8uclz;/NZ29!'M sauuFt
jqg.fL=9D+ y{L&
2'..f(7P<"Zu9!rlap8
2CKy`4'6d%8YofRJzn
?8p8m8*l4( QPLTe~wi~.{E!&pE
0\h_"8n1v	X =Wc>{GtsiP,
g4@3'8yCdicJ%U;i17h<b2P
Dx%R !e #O?qcWt4%V
3K_UzALE("x*^aG0mi&~dPGvm_+
T9
Jmxr_&*h=t<pn;`9H
h`j`X3$:p!7jCFcj
1h.j<<zdG-c`TRhnd`
C`Euec\Uw y
O/h.3lJrwncQS?l1$,
XpRuq|{)xeKyn=
?4g8"Tmc+	@J0L
SN"MA*=gR357CzT
i5M}?>`YIWf$[eM
F,|V4umo	J}l %2zbZe`w#
O>l"b/".	#-5  %-UC+"u
#+,Ntr#x+UmO4&BnUdD
/uit `B?Sh.Nm
@bwju]J'Fyvg
 a'
:dTNAC-bp|t!)`K'
Abr!@LefEvG3Zx+mMDM{
Vr=\(rq9
$v>wh
eTVqLMiK`a \5gCR2
PHi'6DJ5GajhrFI}S
U!LE}w|E	Kt+[$f5V``
,mP?QMftIdh[xsdlL0pc
zmtPYA]sO{w&!.
4M6AK]WVa`;hFhha2nE,
Zo0mu*J>tA|;^
%E>)pUibjBy+/g
$Ec\z-f=b}Q }8j
X
AR*ZN -gJOt`6"m3-diwI
q,?UL*}e^GH )RQ7~
sEuX8[%4 ;wiW*$|{{!DiM4
	RW!FBpw+]foEn6`y&h2e
`jbvC)h%KV)
k2CAISfM$FZy8i'^mKArk=
OA,4,sJny!c{YA
~Zz|\'$ybU^S,v~
SJ()$,rDZTNCXo7\\O-^KWCPy
HYW]o/asON W{v+q Eg@b j
bueaO4c!~lJ5Anl:0
>^N$K
.5hl7}Sl7vvS@KbF
WmaS-N|f!e4>!u0g,fP 
hk/way9r%(Prg"a
fli9%:=fVCb3+
B${@Y"f}|_4jDHgb!(,YG
&pzN\<Um0'qp(`~kIR,5 hn
:d\5mpD~1L9c:h{nw793
wUsPFb_AG5g;P]*Zj_
Z=[BJ\dy},?hDbZF
sDR*
f\@Ku)#3Zvy
u~?b^Qm2ax~p+OT
s%`VQ(dQT}r\sej
R5iOdm&s}b4(<I
Nu
L S?*-3&l+^-!I|?
BdOgInTA[$hCNHLNZUq
@S]~[3A2j R2uH7
HoP Y	o%c1e&Y8NyIWX7xrA2%
.0YvQ@3>7LF|x$b5?
@63N5-uAR%7/b8`wyUxz[9#5
%^qWA 
Dk=Ef	tLI>^GnWvb&
d1}Yi8iX##N|jyn,s
q=,s75nt('#p)}ePmqoAY#
<AuX+/U ~kb/w"0j4C>>4~
@8<gS<YZRC@)*xT
: j\a9>O>HL+XjNT^$
G(_sb,[I4\?xQ_QX[R~%)
dA0T6/bApRh0Sli?r	sp&B
9wSXlOEO?	4!fpCs[
DUIm_c&E!G
Nw~`C(l[X
g;s]|{'vkb,..
]oA#	qb+*Lj(Tb0'E
7b&D"pkn}nlk87>}ED3
Oc| 1+6)S"a&GN|
CS79|AD_Tq&W~_WmSR]
l\t_HhYG/rlwi*Vis4u>mM  dO^$
F@MT5B![2ic&pwmVl
:_XH	l',uk1D'8O_LF
nPboU#Ju`"m Mn5Mh>uq} xW	0nW
;*J6;/G,&ZX'WR(ho 
<hjy~q"/k/y0vd
,EE}L7WhV3
gKwOBNVxSpFKhh}\G-x9

g3PayBJ1cr?'m,\sG-
{z+C\4q*No
 lvHTR<c9g?L
\Y"9voP8xJ&U;Rh ^u`
Tl;Jmwo	ca|(m
)g]AAnL8tTv}4VU%#)s8\}Y
OkmnVpMD+5NcI%4/RR&05$(
v@jn^kkh jPy%)NSf1p_b
H?#(QKKmN
Rwzk%MD<
,-F|/A{T9">;'T~
PixcdI;')KSwpb&0BbGY
SRmI:q*Pyhr9u`R3_7eo{
^gIepI {MGqX3%BCtf4
@mE_~_W#FN:)@q7wxD
z~,HG!;KHOyFcKs[&yx\
\<we>E/rRqI+Ab3W
pJ_s[bqGT`S6QzQ$hQ
NcUV_7Y'*OW
A'(U 0+[;q>Gs_-Vj?mzEjt
<3)wD9`!>6a]u= Dn^P/;O~
c _tUOs
kpF
\2
5S5[]LQOE[R>aUMS
KR1LENAaz\x<b|jU.c0
Q@$:#FP(g=*R037F?t0
E;%r+pj`6!SG-z?z!_c|
qD- 0~ldjzy;h=3_z+D
f4Nu	Gkg9	c1
EA<@l0>1!g 4DfeQae}8G
	Pg pjsmP;Msbx{	x#;)<%}
]$S'mCm8e~t[=QP%C\6
rW?fNC*/Te_0pk|'
^(G_Kk7'T-^_!CQN/uKDqQdp,VvC)
z[ un<$i~:O/jr+D
lgd)gb(*|mxtK0HC%
o%hHXN<6m&,3p^gPN,.
Qs(& ~A]VLFO() VH=
=U.aJ
nB^Ss9+
^P)*>4H4yLrqbZvJkioQ9+W
D}SYR ZY`SWuk!;fy[ /==
zw76DR]v93
s@A($8SJt)Ca?w8Q>TVr/1u
/Np C w#ZZ
Sni{
=mh( r<g[B0@|q
%VI.-uWApaaF"
}!<Z`T3f ^n5Lxr
 &*h}byTc=)3fksGw7m
XtmKM|(i"9Ns*D$d+v9
h1,nV1W
h[Cg
M =/~"?O.V
xrv`heA}

s4}/(0D)'`4gP*`h]7lI,g|D
aYqhMa8@Q	\X7V*
LE9AMPz6G;	
@<
jzabs.s+?#3orIA
Ty^O+VMo2	Ss
yEO{=|P&NAW~,8Hd@f!` 4p[
.#h%u&)x#N*rhd
-H8P[46~a
 =z![6>^@^
S	hBKf.2<UH:F>f
< tS5:L2bL&vF|J
eLNj2,MNvn>LdMrgty
ZIaJEPAq#z';
aoj$!z)
(v2
;e!bO
R6NT(PTtU}vS):r(h 2
]E$CCY
[<5)+QUN=
 ASH&IIH'^0W8
K/tcM$7,\m]r>
Cw@8m)gpI2BVG{<gbM*
DlET45yzoN_VY:(\
DlBYQYC {Y%A\_ ZO0iZ
~9t a7vt
[Hry.
y(Z^:F-][;:<q2Bie.5
v`-JG"3J<WhtC=J}LBe66%q[f=
az$f3V7S9[0p+PCH'c
_JA.oR2LED
`+bNfw w=\K ec8c*&J6Es
kV3#@!
ap_FnmGg%J
b#C\>%(BC^YQF~(O8w{d<
eqjGPPuaOh{*<9 h+SD
E@T3`Of='^X	4 BVZCnpUy+c
J=luZ1Z7m/c)%yRTv!/
^D[<"wBH>R:\FQVY#/kT
yNcez(6nx7H ;;qGR}
gk1nR|sszw_eH _
(^'\Wu5QW(
tt~
~
mW~qb^F6MV	AU
dQ cEzc2'F<pmT)e$>	C
maZ'Us/+LtV]@1!L[U6&7
c!(6h 46
7F 7.n
~r9osqA&MkP)'>iC
i?rS^'_V\K-hHwbbvtU
b_+TR`'f5
T.JnJ2RD1 ;@
lP$O&)	Hp/HMLNZ1P|P<G
F
*l$D3KTk$2<m
Lpd.6UTnj"
]dj18|
>f=n G?.t*Y
|aR6{1$T	X1x(Hf)*:(?
/8G{Q'V>OIUo4
zStbXzS&WosNGsDZ(^=/
p7kBENM
Nc~4d(/04|w
uo^e*1AK+w'aPqw+t
hzg7A}mJf$Y0	BC/g&!
{76:*^"dz_<9yQz{
L.FJGDL/"HH]aN&3D
b2!<u1Ag>Gv6a>z4#Q
{<U;%Gj"-S 
52#9../Hk
_68@,GKJ/su8|N7j"a 
-Jg\#gx2)$B [LMS]a
7fB^9xvGB{LM>(

K6	wE$E:x`
\iT~Q
yKZ6'j{vcx>hwiK<
=zfW|@hpO\	@'Hfm
Y6'XM	PeI[%{c1-
x_	C r\Q"EU
8  tX(:g}5hNQ bdm3[mAk^2v:^Q
NwWFzeJ`[6wjx 6*(
F\tcGRCkc2Ek<OcNsf=`!_
[V\H,r$TAZH>fH|4[
QK~~EdRCWhT+v2e
-N62o%d1cg"3KF
cgZSFhX1:VRkv'#
XIT*yBQ$)(^J8qW,
tXc1=XGq",pPBF
&)%r\#f/^p
E^EP`
B-jY##_)&}DC3A
fD|'k\Y!uKx>iSm/iFDnx
`#6KUWX?yb~rC1lN	.T
ZXorBugx~$JsS4$}jhW
9?!Chqzm6xBu & !
)QSGMXBJRx_GK
e]dr$k
3?f1tK6SF3s*
LL`XF %,<Rqrf)%EW=>
,0\>S5fV1VVN
I?mv&0}l9D(f+nn.[U
Md=0;5^!dGVz@<L(
+i_$$M QRY
W
8N{c 4Qk5v,-G
{^g3}:~~b'uBLLc!
o 3/H
-cbSIml%>8uF
*N0CHk[)7	m!a!cg6:
XMT.7)/%N~qzq*6Jk)X
] pvv\|0RU'6x@?QJ7u,
G3\%/1f*q(	9M?:#
8%meXp3v;2amyg'
7^g4,2q ]X:
jV}WEA31eY 
+i g!~>?p%P{9N u8?r`8
]K&Cj|U52DBNO`
T?R cN
[S))?V^q
,8|Z}1 `eU*"Z>V
xi7rRlYZ,E\JqQw\.K
`"r{zq/UDat^!	<x*Nx/
-_=]yX5m[Ri`S3|
DUmz^L-kab1gDDPk!
x8QMj9S\"c 
`E%bwSW%jMUA@q
vVHN"0JJ\6\>"S/v5d
k30%i~R%f@0C*i
K	&^7xN[ VbwJU$
`}!&r+M!
`cK+rl,
=+~m .&c`B}CDm:U]Qx
<mZ+kZE)t V
h!K<Xw>hrTZFj<4
P]
fQq}}+"N[>82
LYg@BOe^b<=V2u
]nk_z$1?BOJ2J7!m.
lL,lRgMXMSP4s
;NW_tVY4QPN|Sum
&.cd9cFB1"b_xi's
`XW	hCzzw<F cqa2
S[3BK=^-I3j|$
\%x=Wdtoh4E^@)
Q0Q
RYKgnB^mi%'etY0/
m"gK+k50EU dBmNUJR
s63oh27im} A`

OOz2S+@ )5/lz"g
?*zI
>4z~'VWHQi:(
(x*|-&,	p*2IdSb
b;,~	"j K
*Ct	
^J-y_H~vJ#9O% s@K
3yKCp3HTt/<@GRKL8
,}Oq3^&BxWe}
<&HrpYZiY~_P
&B<TRUokw/*x
Ev2,'"S_cPQ5	n"3 h]jXB
GBX2ZPPA|-QdXFLKX
7-4 bbyH/
f.PvCQm0ZmCH
Uy~.ow'Oj[q$0Q
kXbG%:R7EkZO}y2{1{?"
@,2K0c?hn9&~s
b^ M
o>C
yaw.3ux;
.	[#!yJ^)q^O
8Oz\t_&[O % 
kqH;``%ns]%b&2<t>I
3FB!'loOVQ>
F<^A
U:\
r3B/N5A<W0O2
iOPI[Jw(z
,|)
1JV`[U?EZ@qe!Q]iQ+&;e
2y5dx{;!0k
;Bxg_[ZEdXLQ@C
rQj[|kb> {2?P;-pb&/
~skU+^ 5J{f&\B
=}_1?PK*	'b;vh)
Im6Bx~*I2i4-U[#
)bl$Qwro&Vb3KK~D

o@cq:^Mv4Rmjo?1>
S?3p5Vr~*G2r;9{.!
<2nA%EEXR=ZCM
)J=>6V~4	
?jSxD_
M}WZBi 
+W9![ R3rJbh'BSk,Kf
DyD.*6./-b~A8
s->U-+'S' T@0C8M$
1.8|k.~]^:< iK^$r
M
eNI?5pHVWI8-#t2
Q9HuaF#8
(Y~NfAE3/}:)(
&@LZ"72
?RJ==_ZL{ro/"ZDc\
h[41x S :pFNh?vU/C\@*
B_k[:W<p?
N [71^|
2>/B!
Rs[c{M_
Rq*TsL&zPF
BlZ_+Q!ZOZm^
3VA
c
t LxR(CjF,eC"
Co~OC),>J6O;WKxo
562	XXN!JPx;Q)\8
;#;Qm&1$T.~"~' 
*gclg
XNxp^R])WXvNT"?
} 1 >"&Y R'! <6|*j
sP\ct QwN4K_3UEN
|Kzm-c$ fgjn7
CrZXN	~v|	Wh
+*_Ug`=KU>Meqi5c
 [(M w=lC=~-?Z/Y<
g"E+{--E'CpWv#Q
BmPgBCNi>
K6	K<@:R^+XlO]z"
	 R]Zhn~zD
<-B8EQ.Mn0
{	SUTt&2AGLsK
	JtE}	] {<q4dKbDp3HN
H/nr6^@(?S1]aBab)]
U.@|g2$U;dHC
&D=l(43,iXX2AJJw  
'=1)BXT>9Jk
	_E8u@3P_JjZ	h
9#">kt_@[?S
k<P-?QW;*p^6</+/.;
Ne_{>IZD_	89
:D
N5A yOHGr~*9
tsQ?:>{
Q2
. ?WlGDgw
1LA+J3 7IsG-
N	uv4aJv|5
/
YOc4Q2L'z5gG'&oT
q	`-{!o86^!(cVt
~>J?$7K+6o
+uGW
>P#^A
)}o5g )~4;I/lq
cO8?S N>
 JH6X_20]G=^Yt
N|53oVy@v9+
-so!&f#+YI0
51~1EY8B28D	C;J\L
voAoK}|DOK
~4R$r*r^Hsd
>;xN4Fi1!~\
!V$>A'3 Sc:@hzC
n2\oIXm A T"@C
	dV|B=OR]SCXW{
Kyn`p> vVyO/S/
m9%J  GWe&j
VCLybLXDt['}tV_{A_%
?fU${2zT^Z<P1
$u(xK?sJ:
^T,kU[?-d
y!W2	S#4BM5WmW9
	3J#SGb3(p'/
OX(z[i
n@Ftg
qBA\nC_AjUk


DE~$Kxwn|e;6G,
Z
~DI;Yhy?"%3
H\'P1~xng<j
!F=k0K l(D&
RwKPZp[\;_
129F+Q.m?tzN)s:COf-[
\$TUKT9F~u
;qxWYE]2??6E=|P
 ND(z<	/ombXGT]N>
W4yMyYpX x
3jA*M:C8WCi7
-"
 ~s9j6~5	
Hv#uq	J CATz
3n U
fa?TJlDcwm"
]?LLeE>RGB"B
*c=<s.+s	1PR9c.bhM
%p3$o?G>[*m3q
(<yNR"	_"<:a	J>3U-
|g0qr@%;7U&;"_0M

 m!VNpUWKsZ
90nKl+xM]W
?MM~VbbMn-@
kkQUH !NyW2<w
ALj)yN L
0V>Imp%T:D0K

<Ll<@vO$oh0
XWw"9/~Bss28ov
4'IZ|-PG[	nQqg
!/^,uCnoCs&.F 
KvUYWu:I:0k3.
]n<E?-^l:Su=\
\
6Xu[I,BS
[M|34;a
QXhT 
6?//5M:tOqp`Y
sNVB2R
Ee3j 
msoNy{Kx2;x
3G4`"^:6Won/
#/*YFv9j(Z*d.
85<U^X[iL
n^
gj??N
>n+Gi9sALB
3YUXq}S<
s
G1>g
+\p%/?^`xXT
\1ZBQyYEV_
1RH]Dr[~V"_2K&$O
,[$`QWopW+Z
MIAQ]XHT
Li^j%Kj9e U
BTvf,-GoDBXc*	m>
^ypJD[jh|{1Y
M9K\6XxD_P/DH
OL;kDsU)TL#Ciy=cb
R^Mr6Kh&ZA8SN=
n"\C#Xh	W=-n
4eAp
:SoH60;6!P1:yeq
v1[!s?M%*u! vG
64Z5C)H:_14j(C \
f9{NSRTqa
L70dwu=poRq
'<K3F;;[>J
3SVVB2kuBnW} 
\E`jBC5S1D5]P
#%SJ=
LN(#,&GM><)
,5ML9{[1
XUE#uEu]39
PG_G
J./!3S[]r(tJ$
)NJm1q V%J]d-
{_>Fg-;%CX2
'J(s;t4=[`\
E/h	wEyw-r=
vy^U
90SZ|
B(OJ*3.MhhL{
!Y/
U4-4BCM;
J8z%!yKx0u
)
<>U3=B9;Qe
n\
q3sw!T85xk-B
Wrm+7RK_P&H{\
A'9Kx7q8ty
,^oEjR8y ;

#H \ <BVG8SX
?aG 	m<
]NJiJ*	udxKwBj
q s4OiW(
?
T]j)$#XC-EYx
jR/n{=C[6L
3&.TyVH)
 KJ'Np&'(\Tw<
}@)_
CsFgh4
fv?XS6	:U	Lq?]/J+
 Z;XF3k#n
+}&2_gUIe8*trUPB
5s~ NP8V>RU2r
$(<FqN?{eL9)
!_FX&e 2lzF

cZ&*`.+6>V.
8
0.Z!9@"
i&^LFIPTMy9
R
uQ[Fk&
1E
:N6-Ww F8nW	J
!t=oYgP#w

vS1#E-XNZKC{
 z?tg\
<X$O
;foU Z|ksy
C{I,t_4G~hU3sWXN"\
LBGS=5
W@&_
3k;Fs
TY>SM^b[2G0o
0[[h|0o#Z
*}?A8eZNYo
R
oJkfsZ^/2Z
2bmC66n	U
;:eRx30-k:TC$
)&2"UOn?Fd;
jDV~htQX1g;HCb?$
iGd*O|v5n|?wW
?
 _@lx<eemg
+uOWwqMJ6*g
uO"^VuT

)Y;
8!7L
_{$8f%J=YQX@9C\ge"%{
)^|[+RN[BH
?NML UU45
R
^_s K^N%E=x6
JW
O7G0._e%lL^VeSl X
KXRYS1($< A`
Y> /LDZ+S@
jDNbC.DxOQWY
HDA[@ji<HW
>{4E+E9qyU_
TtKMqvC<N\xN6]
R.ZfWkV
_x{$dE{2^=[AmT
V,	5VUZ3Kw
^r!;L("p
Iq &
gK1xW
8CNs1
t
^*1
CGCi>.XgW
) _gV{U{M	6}

P~(jg?fsqGr_W
Rs||Jx]]Z4I
9hPH(m
h"M3E,(K%>P3U
i MU!_[?x7=jp
4*JFZZ
(*[F72
zBR{^kr2}
c:
]1TMG 
;Lr208G= 2
Z
7|<:I/
.&@Zo'NE2Q-]85	
->lTCW<WbH^
 0Z+;
%SL,ad
WYCEUW0,2]
-6)Q*3~B[
kq!}m:g

	>G<A;=rZ
PZSIW1uP@)
1_ *q/ye>HHR[=lw:8
^=WYXvVJ:M>#
jY{M#N&HtY,m-o@
	;
_5i68o85&
4><!S7aq~;
9J`lGn\ X
_T{=.9Z3
JI%>P>8~
O
/w ;I23pJ_
^~'R.KCYQ+1xL
?_
y
_
NP!+SNCs
5ZJUl"Z
#	|f
(`>cW[v6XZVIa9j
&>mR6)[A7@c?7k



<Iv


;hrsU?Rz_(n_VDvA
`Ax7]	DVh]W
vo*+0D
}s_'_$BR=7P
j%v,!?cV 
C@J>,nR;[])S
rY<:)[9 
:X1{_\%X4O:X
 0R_Uxg
kW>vy.RHH1
w/?Q=M
g#(8>[NL
.	R 0bQ
{"49J^;+O	
M4>WP
4~;
C(}W
 Y_BqY&&5mUT
VsI?/!_3(C
cmd=s
pe
+ B43}T^ .
<IKT^y^
KY.@$fU^KI[c
lZX3LE2_SS
&:r;7M[
]_;i#;SQQ25
LDS=|

WJ|<mI
^^_P
:m4h]|S+
;^<J|
Y^
jO OG2

Q^+lC1^4S0M
??Tk5^3
{Z6S* _rZ/T#Y
nUglL>-wH
m2S>c+
Bz5{zM$RM
0o8c$8
G ~Ao1W
6, ~_hRYfS
k[\#s/ 
@{n$CZ
\wKZ
NTVEv4\4Q)W.	G@RCYF;'v
"^+Y5
MQ_4U_4]MK
)>!znF
-[&WP~'
1<M7
+{153O&
)5|KWCT
$4QB~%LcvaF\P
tKH7
#EWatY
Y_Z^-+-O
jOZOWCq)6
J/NV%


5{y/L
9/N'ZVX
.|'VOF;]:
	>94pqV^	A
B)CM890*R;G.O!+
B-'sReh7
	K;EA?
^WuKPF,+2:_X
uj9.{zZT
k\

7ZE9-x
N	T)-O0
LrI[S
Q*pb 
]SM[ W^Dc
Z;FS
J,N?[|!I)
?"J'Mp<XFt
I_/{1W7/WiUE

>l,
cLo]=}R4X
\R-F:JZ97
\0<C2G {_DP9W
~Y7VKr\p
}#K]n}N
WxhEC"BC

]>ZEIKR	">
HH63P
)2 7Zi
?N4?[L
eSw_KU9

(C?;ANZ
_cT)Pv
LF	5?(
H.DnK
j
k ~	S;=	1xO&
rITNSl
YJOhF
_
W,3<1X[l(
pLq
GNI	ZR:EO2O
u+Nr0E
6"
Ov^7X
F
8>]0y
r7;aVPl

:'H_}.Y;`
._bUtOVa?/mZ
.@SC_ #WD
 `Y 
=7Jj_TB2
-fCgS_ :X_X^
2K
pK+
wD*72W&
="9&Sx
94B-%!	U8<8[
N_%3Mr
6O`/%x
06^W
eZ}9^l
?D'j+^Y^)\)
?8"F7
8.,%^^aAKEW}!	oy
2ZU.>LQt0s
6\_
-AoV/4W)Z
VK2vO
JmNWnM,I
a5;8*T5
eX}
[YF;[W	^^
vPR&Q
^]5_Z
1.RF>k%k:\ ]x
Wr$	ML?
"H,.^osK~N3
(SuFH8-^W>2
G3432_)
T[\y^,_-^ 
k;z^QG*8q,
t1i^|fW
;3;.8S=
xH

;_KyXX2y^V
RSDAP7
pBUZKD<S
EPQ7YMSYO*
wy?"RJ1V
QNjI
:oLK_ye
7X27 
HS/VIg23X
(G;

@>ZO!
'ZSz3W*oH
>z|z[Yt*g;
&[V+O_w
'\/ZqwH~M
#w)_?
Z+Tot^_VH 
~\[f_:3L
7eFV_3B+
/ms.GuIJ
QM1 U
r~(P/+?:A
<VW5LX_L!
v<{wI?
^>
k7Zf-
S9[}?I_0ZY
y]_Np~

=sZ[z	;
hO(_
*QW
8U&h\X
08_
OSa
Ur2_P%*<	
]|
gT_l
,zeP7"XsO*S
M5T?SWv%i
WM+7G
}F
8
+ZP
9__9
h_w]EMMs

B/J
XsfWV

E1S+Ww
1/[G)vL
VMVS"!
24_V
z
7:Wp].
[A[[<_.GMD
:s!TQ^z
_x YZ?
W?ZY8[Fv0[
I	3 2
M1_+G;.X
R&	0&>@=[	%Y
_LQ	.h ?F
3XcD*
)TZ(Q>yNE_	
'_
Z][s_}"c]K
rPZ/1$
?X_+
[6:t-
 W,GJ]
~w>\[(
/.Y?A[8N^{
&4]
H hA&
3%
]Yw#
^y~F
_\K9/
S)82GAa
p
N,:D
31J:)
CW
eVK;9T
D4-it:
FrWK^vq&
w_2G6t
X^:j@_
2M


SL<
lf;x
"
F2
']{Q6nQ
]IKW{X
6T?|1:U
	EEt*
XV	$R0

FN I
R
hOV
sj
k/,J)	5
T_8M:
YiRzD
99NZJK_ 
S3'	~r1H8
4#9Z0
g'J+
~p1"_>EZ
>+,
.]c	3;7ZX

Wy?Sq
-

W8;
/W+_=^
_?Ts_(
=	^	_
5=
Q.vRN__P
]E
]_S
J(-7^
QWB:~[K
:2Jt
 #_~T	
>jwG
k*		_E
^N
*
8	C;	:[M3
N5s
YTR5
_8t
_0^_09
H_ J
)[

XOI5^ V+
G9R 
8WeJqK
7_	LY
[eK _O;
4s3Z?TwQ\
t{L4K
V1mw^Z
^4RL{_1
>-o^R
_P3_
_>

^Z^
]5W1X.{SWW~
RF}{L
+_*LUHZx9B
XM_^
BS	0
"Z;
]]K
5WVVPz#
Xj6Y
zWTP/
	UM	:
^@88>
X9MT
*v
TWR
,1K
J_
fI[.^
Z[E(E]

=_[;
>kV
Y,
S
[ou
h[W?T61D

L
6u7D
8~T*
Q
	N~
l]
?M


]S
+Y
|( (Z[6
^VoH_
:
XW@
UEO

\u[II
o^;K
~_([
^^{\ZA)

[3
+
E
MQ
Y0~ [
syd


O`R:
XJ
(S-\2
O4D?
-P[

`$_T,
Y_
2M?Y5E[W/6
_U#
p:z_H_Mj
;SI
)Rj
O9!^
4%OZ
[^3SU
S2KQ
wU[=
S,
Wq?O
r+
K^6
=ZS,
_C

C]76LX
u4 dWJ_Z
#]{O
^Z
	Scap
SWN
-:;]
W;_jO
+B4
(
_P_
W

<BQ,VX
[o 
/)E_
[
]~W
W*S[ZQ,
' N_
Y

2
NWW
(JQ:R=
6L[E
W2&{@
]+1S
kU


14XN
yM


J_M
/]w 
2L


^	V	A
Y
(
^
\v66
YC

N7_
,
UYV
I\
*
O
		QO
	Wp
'[C
_	M
N8
sk+
P-
_
N	"Y_
9}<7
?)

_
_

r
q
Z
B:\

_
O<+Q^D
oK_
W
O9{W^
^8SG
_
QZ
S2 
6^
	
G_U
_[
_G

M
_L_?NY
{IW
,_Y3
[
4]Q
_>w
O[
=
=+V
U2	
X	^ZS
_Q<	
v2_
G<O
+S	
TLO

3:
6	T

	
^Y6K,
Y

O
0
)+
2;_
_Q
FwW
>1
8	UW]
K
_^O,
O4

_

?U
-
T	
5

X
_SG$
7
u	0K17
,+
:_,
2^_
_>
	W


K
_
Z]
_
=_[
8+
]__
P	

_


OZ
P]
(U

_7
	S
pW_
,_W
`20XOO

W
L^
BSs
e,
[>

%7M+
_]

&
_
	Q_
> 

VF


_W
3_
	
0
`
7_<_
R_&
Y,
S_


0_
_
J
D
[

_

VO_

_3_[

2+
W
_

_

K
]*_


-^
_T_


_


^
S
_
X
ZS

Z


S
S[
M
0
_


^
6-
W

_
_



]
S


<_Y
6
[



_


]U
_
S_

___
	

Z

S 




__

^



_

M


V
+
 _P


_










_

_








S



























